 JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 31 December 1978
  Today is the last day of the Year of the Lord 1978. We take leave of this year thanking God for all the good we have received during the twelve months that have passed. We bid farewell to it asking God for forgiveness for all the evil that, in the course of these twelve months, has been inscribed in human hearts, in the history of peoples, in the history of continents. We ask God for forgiveness for our sins, for our shortcomings and negligences. We pray to have the grace and the necessary strength to enter the new period of time, the new year, and, as the Apostle says, not to let ourselves be overcome by evil, but to overcome evil with good (cf. Rom 12:21).
In the period of Christmas our thoughts and our hearts are particularly directed to children. And it is right, because the Child Jesus was born for us at Bethlehem.
Today, however, I would like these thoughts of ours, our hearts and above all our prayers, directed to the smallest and the youngest, to go to "the more elderly". I have in mind not so much those who are of middle age (in the prime of their physical strength), but rather those of advanced age; grandfathers, grandmothers; old people.
These persons are sometimes forsaken. They suffer because of their old age. They also suffer because of the various troubles that advanced age brings with it.
But their greatest suffering is when they do not find the due understanding and gratitude on the part of those from whom they are entitled to expect it.
Today, on the Sunday after Christmas, dedicated to veneration of the Family of Nazareth, let us remember and meditate on the fourth Divine Commandment: "Honour thy father and thy mother." This commandment is of fundamental importance for the development of "relations between the generations" not only in the family, but also in the whole of society. Let us pray to God that these relations will develop in the spirit of the fourth Commandment!
It is just to the oldest that we must look with respect ("honour!"); to them families owe their existence, education and maintenance, which have often been paid for with hard work and much suffering.
They cannot be treated as if they were now useless. Even if they sometimes lack the strength to be able to carry out the simplest actions, they have, however, experience of life and the wisdom that the young often lack. Let us meditate on the words of Holy Scripture: "What an attractive thing is judgment in grey-haired men, and for the aged to possess good counsel! How attractive is wisdom in the aged, and understanding and counsel in honourable men! Rich experience is the crown of the aged, and their boast is the fear of the Lord" (Sir 25:4-6).
Therefore, the Pope's thoughts and prayer go to you old people today. I hope that all those present are willingly in harmony with the Pope; I hope that above all the youngest are. Grandchildren love their grandfathers and their grandmothers, and keep them company better than others.
Thus let us conclude this year in the spirit of rapprochement of the generations, in the spirit of mutual understanding and love.
  © Copyright 1978 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II 
ANGELUS
Monday, 26 December 1978
  Yes, I have understood, you want to pray with the Pope and we will pray, although the recitation of the Angelus together was not on the programme for today.
After the recitation of the "Angelus", the Holy Father, moved at this unexpected presence, wished to speak again.
I rejoice with you and I wonder why you have come. Perhaps you came to see if the Pope is at home on the second day of Christmas. And then, I think you have come because today is really a beautiful day and attracts one outside. But the Pope has to stay at home because he never knows when people are coming to recite the "Angelus". Then I think you have come because you know that the Pope needs your prayers and needs above all to pray with you. I thank you for this and for this unexpected but certainly all the more welcome and precious presence of yours. I want to wish everyone a Happy Christmas again. Especially the young.
Having finished speaking, the Holy Father, hearing the acclamations increase continually began to speak again and, among other things, said:
I do not understand what you are saying. You do not have microphones. But I understand that you love the Pope. Thank you and a Merry Christmas to all of you again. Blessed be the name of the Lord.
  © Copyright 1978 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II  
ANGELUS
Sunday, 24 December 1978
  "Hodie scietis quia veniet Dominus; et cras videbitis gloriam Eius," (Ex 16: 6-7). Today you shall know that the Lord will come; and tomorrow you shall see his glory,
The liturgy of today addresses us with these words: it is the eve of the Nativity of Christ. It is the last day of waiting, a day of deep joy, since the Lord is about to come, and we will see him, as every year, in that unusual place of his birth: in a stable, in a manger. This is, in fact, the place that men "assigned" to him: the inhabitants of Bethlehem and, in a certain sense, all men. And God chose this same place for his Son. This reality must be carefully meditated upon, and we will do so during midnight Mass.
Now, according to the custom on Christmas Eve, I wish to express my most cordial wishes to you. At this moment, I formulate them above all as Bishop of Rome, and I wish to address them to all Romans. Yes, I want these wishes of mine to reach each one of you, because today is a day on which every man approaches the other man.
I want these wishes of mine to arrive at every home, every family. In the Christmas festivities one feels more the need of being close to the members of one's family, in the warmth of the domestic hearth. Let me, too, therefore, join in this union of hearts of yours.
I wish for the parents that what they desire for their children may come true. I wish for the young that the humanity, that is, "the goodness and loving kindness of God our Saviour" (cf. Tit 3:4) may be revealed to them in a particular way.
With the same wish I go spiritually to every parish of Rome and to all the Houses of men and women Religious.
I address especially nomads, the sick, the suffering, the old, the abandoned, the underprivileged, all those who are alone and far from their families, in order that they may accept the love that Christ offers them for the salvation of every man.
My wishes extend, furthermore, to all environments of work, study, artistic activity, scientific research and every human activity.
I knock at the doors of the various Institutions of community life, in its multiple aspects, and I say "Peace to men of good will", because it was this message that was proclaimed in the cave of Bethlehem.
I invite everyone to the meeting at midnight, the Christmas vigil, for the loving banquet which the Saviour of the world has prepared for us.
I address particular words of gratitude and brotherly communion to the Priests, the Bishops and the Cardinal Vicar of Rome.
Beloved Brothers and Sisters!
May that which today's liturgy announces to us take place in our lives: let it happen, therefore, that we may know (scietis), accept, and live in the depths of our conscience the truth that "the Lord has come".
Let us accept it "today" (hodie) remembering that this today is the essence of all our life on earth. And that "tomorrow" (cras) we will be able to see his glory and participate in it!
The joy of Christmas now close makes particularly keen my deep affliction at the serious plane crash which took place last night near Palermo, causing a large number of victims, largely emigrants, who were returning to their homes to spend the approaching festivities with their families.
I have already expressed my sentiments in this connection in a telegram to the Cardinal Archbishop of that city. I wish, however, to renew now the assurance of my prayer for the souls of those who lost their lives in this accident. At the same time I express to their relatives my deep sympathy with them in their loss, and address to the wounded my good wishes and my encouragement.
    © Copyright 1978 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II 
ANGELUS
Sunday, 17 December 1978
  Today I am addressing especially the boys and girls who have come to St Peter's Square to bring the statue of the Infant Jesus to be blessed by the Pope before being laid in the Crib prepared at home.
1. Welcome, beloved daughters and sons! I greet you with real joy, especially because of the gesture, so significant spiritually, which you have undertaken to carry out so enthusiastically.
The first plastic representation of the Crib sprung, as you know, from the brilliant intuition of St Francis of Assisi. Deeply struck and moved by the humility of the Incarnation, on Christmas night in 1223 he got a faithful and pious friend called John to bring to Greccio all that was necessary: straw, hay, the manger and an ox and a donkey in flesh and blood. "I would like"—the Saint said—"to represent the Infant Jesus born in Bethlehem, and to see, so to speak, with the eyes of the body the hardships he suffered for lack of the things a new-born child needs, how he was put in a manger and how he lay in the hay between the ox and the donkey" (Tommaso da Celano, Vita Prima, n. 84). Various friars came to the place; men and women arrived rejoicing from the lonely cottages in the region, carrying candles and torches to illuminate that night on which, as the biographer notes further, "there shone forth splendid in the sky the Star that illuminated all days and times". A priest celebrated the Eucharist and Francis of Assisi, who was a Deacon, sang the Holy Gospel with his strong, sweet voice, clear and resounding,
2. From Greccio, which had become like a new Bethlehem, the representation of the Crib, which had sprung from the heart of a Saint, capable of realizing the most sublime poetry in life, spread throughout Italy, Europe and the whole world. It kept intact, in the various expressions of culture and folklore, the fundamental message, truly evangelical, which Francis wanted souls to grasp from contemplation of the Crib, a school of simplicity, poverty, and humility.
Modern society is not always, unfortunately, supporter and messenger of these attitudes, which are sometimes considered even as weaknesses or as frustrations of the human personality. Yet the Son of God, to meet man, to walk by his side, to save him, chose the absolute emptying of his personality, the total lack of means and human instruments, the struggle against pride and arrogance.
3. As I bless your little statues, beloved children, I think with serene hope of you, of the immense good that you can do, precisely because you are little, within your family, the school, the Associations, and society itself. Not for nothing did Jesus himself choose you as models for those who wish to have a part in his Kingdom (cf. Mt 18:4; Mk 10: 15).
Take home, with great care, the little statue of the Infant Jesus, also as a sign of the Pope's love for you and your families. Put it in your Crib with intense faith, with that faith wherewith the Blessed Virgin, the Mother of God, laid the new-born Jesus in the manger (cf. Lk 2:7). Invite your father, your mother, your brothers and sisters, the whole of your family, to gather round the Crib in these days of the Christmas Novena, to recite together the prayers learned on your mother's lap, to sing the sweet carols, so charged with human and Christian sentiment.
May the Infant Jesus, present in the Crib of your home, be the concrete sign of a limpid and sincere faith, which will enlighten, guide and direct your life and that of your dear ones.
And now, while the period of Advent still continues and its last week is beginning, I present to you a request of mine. During this week I call upon you to pray specially for vocations to the priesthood and to the consecrated life. As we ask God for the earth to produce its crop, so, and even more, we must also ask for souls to yield the fruits particularly necessary for the spiritual life of the whole Church. There is a great need of priests, men and women missionaries, Sisters, catechists, nurses to look after the sick.
Returning home, remember what I say to you; and kneel down in prayer more than once together with the Pope and with everyone to ask: Jesus, send workers into your harvest (cf. Mt 9:38). You will help me a great deal with this prayer. Jesus who loves you particularly, dear boys and girls, will listen more easily to the prayers of the Pope and of the whole People of God, if you, yes, precisely you, pray together with all of us.
  © Copyright 1978 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
   
 JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 10 December 1978
  1. During Advent the Church is united in a special way with the Blessed Virgin. She is a great example for us, indeed, in that expectation of the coming of Christ, which pervades the whole of this period. From the very moment of the Incarnation of the Word, this expectation assumes a concrete form in her: it becomes maternity. Under her virginal heart, the new life already pulsates: the life of the Son of God, who became a man in her womb. Mary is entirely Advent!
And here we see her go, after the annunciation, from Galilee to the south, to visit her kinswoman Elizabeth in Ain­Karin. There, on the very threshold of the house of Elizabeth and Zechariah, the words will be spoken which we repeat whenever we greet Mary: "Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb".
2. At this moment our thought and our heart turn to those regions. We follow Mary from Nazareth towards the south, while there spreads out before us the panorama of her land, of that ground which was to become the homeland of the Messiah. Whole generations of Christians go on pilgrimage to this Holy Land, to find themselves in the footsteps of the Saviour.
There comes back to my mind the immense joy of the Bishops, gathered in the second session of the Second Vatican Council, on hearing the words of Pope Paul VI, who, in the address delivered at the close of that session, had announced to them that he would go—for the first time—as a pilgrim to the Holy Land.
Oh! How I wish I could repeat his words, at this moment! How I wish I could go to the land of my Lord and Redeemer! How I wish I could find myself in those very streets in which the People of God used to walk at that time, climb to the top of Sinai, where the Ten Commandments were given to us! How I wish I could pass along all the roads between Jerusalem, Bethlehem and the Sea of Galilee! How I wish I could stop on the mount of the Transfiguration, from where the massif of Lebanon appears: "Tabor and Hermon joyously praise thy name" (Psalm 89:12).
This was and is my greatest desire, ever since the beginning of my pontificate. I am grateful for the requests and suggestions that have reached me in this connection. But, though regretfully, I must, at least for the present, forgo this pilgrimage, this particular act of faith, the significance of which can be more deeply understood by the Bishop of Rome, who is the Successor of Peter. In fact, Peter comes just from there: it was from the Land of Christ and Mary that he came to Rome.
3. Meanwhile I beg you, beloved Brothers and Sisters, let us commend to the Lord, in our prayer, this part of the earth, so closely connected with the history of our salvation.
Let us pray for the Holy Land.
Let us pray for Lebanon, which has been sorely tried by war and destruction for many years.
Let us commend to the Lord the special mission entrusted to Cardinal Paolo Bertoli, who has gone in these days to Lebanon.
Let us pray for peace in the Middle East.
Let us commend to the Lord also Iran, which has become a theatre of struggle and unrest in the last few weeks.
We know that the Mother of Christ is surrounded by great veneration also on the part of our Moslem brothers.
Let us pray to her, in order that she may show herself to be Mother and Queen of Peace for the land of her ancestors, as for all the neighbouring lands!
After reciting the prayer the Holy Father addressed a special greeting to representatives of ALMA, the religious Association of natives of the Marches, resident in Rome.
I wish now to address a greeting to members of ALMA, the religious association of natives of the Marches resident in Rome, gathered here to pray with the Pope on the occasion of the feast of Our Lady of Loreto, the heavenly patron of their region. While recalling the illustrious Basilica, in which a special Chapel is dedicated to Poland, and the nearby war cemetery, in which there rest the remains of so many fellow countrymen of mine, I willingly bless the faithful present and their land of origin.
  © Copyright 1978 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
 ANGELUS
Solemnity of the Immaculate Conception
Friday, 8 December 1978
  1. We will shortly recite the "Angelus". In this prayer we will recall the event that took place in a town of Galilee called Nazareth. The event awaited by the whole world, immersed in the darkness of advent, of expectation. "Hail, full of grace, the Lord is with you!" (Lk 1:28).
These are the words of God that the Angel addresses to a poor girl of Nazareth, by name Miriam (Mary), whose parents, according to tradition, were Joachim and Anne, and who from her earliest childhood wished to belong unreservedly, completely, to the Lord, as is testified by the commemoration of the Presentation, which is recalled every year on 21 November.
2. Hail, full of grace. What do these words mean? The Evangelist Luke writes that Mary (Miriam), at these words spoken by the Angel, "was greatly troubled ... , and considered in her mind what sort of greeting this might be" (Lk 1:29).
These words express a singular election. Grace means a particular fullness of creation through which the being, who resembles God, participates in God's own interior life. Grace means love and the gift of God himself, the completely free gift ("given gratuitously") in which God entrusts to man his Mystery, giving him, at the same time, the capacity of being able to bear witness to the Mystery, of filling with it his human being, his life, his thoughts, his will and his heart.
The fullness of grace is constituted by Christ himself. Mary of Nazareth receives Christ, and together with Christ and through Christ she receives the fullest participation in the eternal Mystery, in the interior life of God: of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. This participation is the fullest of the whole of creation, it surpasses everything that separates man from God. It even excludes original sin: the inheritance of Adam. Christ, who is the author of divine life, that is, of grace, in every man, by means of the Redemption effected by him, must be particularly generous with his Mother. He must redeem her in an especially superabundant way from sin ("copiosa apud eum redemptio"—with him is plenteous redemption: Psalm 130:7). This generosity of the Son towards his Mother goes back to the first moment of her existence. It is called the Immaculate Conception.
3. One hundred years ago there died a great Pope, the Servant of God Pius IX. Let us recall today the words in which he expressed the doctrine of the Church on the Immaculate Conception:
"By the authority of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by the authority of the Blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, and by Our own authority, We declare, pronounce and define: the doctrine that maintains that the Blessed Virgin Mary in the first instant of her conception, by a unique grace and privilege granted to her by Almighty God, in consideration of the merits of Jesus Christ the Saviour of mankind, was preserved free from all stain of original sin, is a doctrine revealed by God and therefore must be firmly and constantly believed by all the faithful." (Pius IX, Ineffabilis Deus).
Keeping all that in our minds, let us recite the "Angelus" with special fervour today.
With this greeting of the Angel, Rome, the whole Church and the world prays.
  © Copyright 1978 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 3 December 1978
  1. Today is the first Sunday of Advent. The new liturgical year begins. Every year, in fact, starting from the first Sunday of Advent, the Church, through the cycle of Sundays and feast days, tries to make us aware of God's work of salvation in the history of man, humanity and the world. Precisely by this "adventus", which means "coming", God comes to man, and this is a fundamental dimension of our faith. We live our faith, when we are open to God's coming, when we persevere in Advent. The "Angelus" which we recite reminds us how open the Virgin Mary was to the coming of God: she introduces us to Advent.
2. Today, for the first time, I am going on a pastoral visit to a parish of Rome: the parish of St Francis Xavier, in Garbatella. I am going to this parish as Bishop, to bear witness to the mystery of Advent, which forms the life of the parish because it moulds the life of every parishioner.
I am thinking, above all, of the Advent which is realized in the Sacrament of Holy Baptism. A man comes into the world: he is born as the child of his parents; he comes into the world with the inheritance of original sin. The parents, aware of this inheritance and inspired by faith in Christ's words, take their child to Baptism. They wish to open their child's soul to the coming of the Saviour, to his "Advent". In this way Advent indicates the beginning of the new life: the seal of original sin is removed, in a certain sense, from this child, and the beginning of the new life, of divine life, is grafted onto him. For Christ does not come "empty handed": he brings us divine life; he wishes us to have life, and have it abundantly (cf. Jn 10:10).
We know that every parish is a place in which baptisms take place. In the community of the People of God, which bears the name of St Francis Xavier, so many Romans who are born in our city, and precisely in this parish, are baptized every year. And so it becomes the place of "Coming": it perseveres continually in "Advent", and in each one of its new parishioners it waits for the coming of the Lord.
Let us turn it over in our minds.
3. And let us also think, on this first Sunday of "advent", of another fact. I mentioned St Francis Xavier, because the Church remembers him just today, 3 December. It is well-known that he was a great missionary in the East, in the Far East.
Well, in the last few days, my heart and my thoughts have often gone to the Far East, to Vietnam, because the news has reached us of the death of Cardinal Joseph-Mary Trin-nhu-Khue, Archbishop of Hanoi in Vietnam. Just two weeks ago, I met him here and spoke to him. In spite of his 79 years of life (and a difficult life), he seemed young and lively. However, to be advanced in age has its own laws, and now the news of his death has arrived. Today, therefore, I recall this faithful and tenacious pastor: I recall this servant of God, who, in the midst of his fellow­ countrymen, bore witness so eloquently to Christ, in his country, Vietnam, so far away and at the same time so near the heart of the Church.
This, too, is an Advent theme. Perhaps, at the last moment of his life, that Pastor and Bishop, Cardinal Trin-nhu­ Khue, succeeded once more in uttering the words "Come, Lord Jesus" (Rev 22: 20), thereupon hearing his answer: "Surely I am coming soon".
There is once more a great deal of talk about Vietnam these days. You have all followed the news reported by the newspapers.
Let us pray, therefore, for those Vietnamese who, having left their land, are suffering because they do not find anyone to welcome them with a sense of humanity or to relieve their hardships and meet their needs.
Trusting that the appeal made by the Holy See through the United Nations will attain the desired purpose, I call on you all to pray that the Lord may support and bless the efforts of all those who are exerting themselves to assist these brothers in difficulty.
Let us recite the "Angelus" for this intention and for the Church in Vietnam.
  © Copyright 1978 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 JOHN PAUL II

ANGELUS
Sunday, 26 November 1978
  1. Today is the feast of Christ the King of the universe.
While I was thinking what to say to you today, beloved Brothers and Sisters gathered for the "Angelus", it came into my mind that the words of the Gospel of St John should ring out in the first place here—yes, in this very place, in front of the facade of St Peter's Basilica, in the heart of Rome.
Pilate said: "Are you the King of the Jews?" Jesus answered: "Do you say this of your own accord, or did others say it to you about me?" Pilate answered, "Am I a Jew? Your own nation and the chief priests have handed you over to me; what have you done?" Jesus answered, "My kingship is not of this world" (Jn 18:33-36).
These words remind us of past events, which took place in the distant outskirts of the great Roman Empire. They are not, however, without significance. Perhaps present-day, topical problems still resound in them. In this dialogue, perhaps, there could be found, at least from certain standpoints, the same discussions that happen today.
Christ answers the judge's question and shows that the accusation brought against him is groundless. He does not aim at temporal power.
Shortly afterwards he will be scourged and crowned with thorns. He will be mocked and insulted, with the words: "Hail, King of the Jews!" (Jn 19:3). But Jesus is silent, as if he wished, by his silence, to express to the end what he had already replied to Pilate.
2. But this was not yet the complete answer. And Pilate felt it. And for this reason he asked for the second time: "So you are a king?" (Jn 18:37).
A strange question, strange after all that Christ had declared so firmly. But Pilate felt that the accused man's denial did not exhaust everything: in the depth of this denial an affirmation was hidden. What? And here Christ helps Pilate, the judge, to find it:
"You say that I am a king. For this I was born, and for this I have come into the world, to bear witness to the truth. Everyone who is of the truth hears my voice" (Jn 18:37).
We must all reflect carefully on Christ's denial and affirmation.
Jesus' affirmation does not belong to the trial that was once held in the distant territories of the Roman Empire, but is always at the centre of our lives. It is relevant today. Those who issue laws, and those who govern states and those who judge, must think it over.
Every Christian, every man, who is always a citizen, and who consequently belongs to a definite political, ,economic, national and international community, must reflect on this affirmation.
3. "For this I was born, and for this I have come into the world, to bear .witness to the truth"—Christ the King says before the court of the governor-judge, while waiting for the sentence that would be passed shortly afterwards.
In this connection let us listen again to what the Second Vatican Council said: "The Church, by reason of her role and competence, is not identified with any political community nor bound by ties to any political system. It is at once the sign and the safeguard of the transcendental dimension of the human person'" (Gaudium et Spes, 76).
This is how the contemporary Church thinks and speaks.
The Church wishes to be faithful to what Christ said.
This is her raison d'etre.
In this connection, we think of those brothers of ours, who are tried, and perhaps condemned to death—if not to physical death, at least to civil death—because they profess their faith, because they are faithful to truth, because they defend real justice.
It must be recognized that, unfortunately, similar situations are not lacking also in the world of today. On this day of Christ the King, it is necessary, therefore, to stress the resemblance of those who are undergoing them, with Christ himself, tried and condemned before the court of Pilate.
Let us pray every day: Thy Kingdom come.
We must never forget those who pay for their faithfulness to the Kingdom of God with condemnation, discriminations, sufferings and death. This must be remembered by all of us on meeting in front of the facade of St Peter's Basilica to recite the "Angelus".
  © Copyright 1978 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 19 November 1978
  Today we recite the "Angelus" on the occasion of Sunday.
In many places, however, there is the beautiful custom of reciting it during work, even on week days. When the bell sounds "the Angelus", people interrupt their work for a few moments and remember the mystery of the Incarnation of the Eternal Word, a mystery connected with the Angel's Annunciation to Mary. It is a fine custom, a very meaningful one, but which, unfortunately, in our industrialized and hurried life, seems to be vanishing. In spite of this situation, we cannot forget the deep truth contained in the ancient saying of the Benedictines: "ora et labora"
— pray and work.
Prayer unites men with God and makes them brothers.
On this Sunday, in which "Emigrant's Day" is celebrated in Italy, I wish, with this common prayer, to join all those who, for different reasons, particularly in search of work, earnings, and better living conditions, are outside their country, outside Italy.
Emigration is a universal phenomenon. It is impossible to contain in a few words all that should be said in this connection. One thing is certain. On this day, we must go, with thought and heart, from so many homes of ours, from so many localities of our native soil, to other countries, other localities, other places of work, where sons and daughters of the Italian land are living and working. We will always remember them. Our feelings and good wishes follow them. May God bless their lives and their work. Let them not forget those whom they have left. Let them know that we are thinking of them, caring for them and praying for them.
The Italian Episcopate, by means of a special Commission, is constantly in touch with the emigrants. The other Episcopal Conferences do the same (for example, the Conference of the Polish Episcopate, whose activity in this field is well known to me).
Beloved Brothers and Sisters!
Wherever you are in the world, persevere in faith and keep the noble heritage which you brought from your native land.
We commend you to the Good Shepherd, Christ, and to his Mother.
Interrupt other commitments for a moment and stay here in spirit with us. Let us recite the Angelus together . . .
The Pope also greeted a group of schoolgirls from Padua. His Holiness spoke as follows:
I wish to address an affectionate greeting and sincere congratulations to the girls of the fifth class of the officially recognized elementary School "Pelà-Tono" of Este, in the province of Padua. They have come to Rome to receive the "Livio Tempesta" national prize for Goodness for the year 1978.
Well done! Really well done, dear girls! May your generous dedication to others be an encouragement for all to be increasingly kind to their neighbour, in order to make society better. My special Apostolic Blessing accompanies you, and I extend it to your Schoolmistress, your Superiors, your parents and all your friends, little and big.
  © Copyright 1978 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 12 November 1978
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
Today is a particularly significant day for me. Today, in fact, taking possession of the Basilica of St John Lateran, I am about to assume, in the wake of my Venerable Predecessors, the Bishop's Chair of the Diocese of Rome.
I have prepared for this act by meeting Cardinal Ugo Poletti, Vicar of  the City, Mons. Vicegerent and the Auxiliary Bishops, who outlined to me the diocesan pastoral activities as a whole and their organization. Of particular importance for me, in this preparation, was the meeting with the Roman clergy, which took place on 9 November, exactly on the feast of the Dedication of the Lateran Basilica, and, the next day, the meeting with the Sisters, in whom the Diocese of Rome is particularly rich.
The ceremony in the Lateran will take place today at 5 p.m.
Seeing you so numerous in St Peter's Square for the usual "Angelus" at midday, I wish right now to extend my most cordial greeting to Rome, and to all the Romans, who are now diocesans of the new Pope.
I greet the families: the parents and their children!
I greet the young!
I greet all the sick, and, in particular, those who are in the many hospitals and nursing homes of our City. Together with them, I greet the doctors, all the personnel of the health services, the chaplains and the Sisters.
I greet all elderly persons and those who are suffering in solitude.
I greet all the schools and Universities of Rome and, particularly, the Pontifical Universities, professors and students!
And I also extend a cordial greeting to every parish in Rome, to each one individually and to all of them together.
In these days I have noted that many newspapers carried the news that, after my election to the Pontificate, various persons, journalists particularly, have gone to visit the parish from which I come, Wadowice, in the Archdiocese of Krakow. The present parish priest who, in the past, was also my teacher of religion in the secondary school, has been repeatedly asked to show the register of baptisms for 1920, where my name is written together with notes about my Ordination, Episcopal Consecration, the call to be a member of the College of Cardinals and, finally, what happened on 16 October this year.
My thoughts went back with emotion to my native parish. It reminds me that every parish is the fundamental community of the People of God, in which Christ is present by means of the bishop and priests who operate in his stead.
Thus today, I am thinking also, with great emotion, of every parish in Rome. I am thinking of all these communities, living cells of the Church of this diocese, which the Lord has entrusted to me in such an amazing way.
Setting foot on the threshold of the Lateran Basilica, I set foot, at the same time, on the threshold of every parish, on the threshold of all the parishes, which in Rome number 296.
On this day, so solemn and so important for the new Bishop of Rome, I embrace everyone in my mind and in my heart, and I commend myself to you in mind and heart. I commend myself particularly to your prayers.
Let us recite the "Angelus", recalling in particular the deceased Bishops of Rome!
    © Copyright 1978 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
 ANGELUS
Sunday, 5 November 1978
  Blessed be the name of the Lord! I wish to dedicate this Sunday specially to the Patron Saints of Italy. I am aware of the fact that, ascending to Peter's See in Rome, I have found myself at the centre of the history of this country and this nation.
Italy! Who does not know its past, connected with the might of ancient Rome! Rome 'the city and Rome the empire. Peter, to whom Christ had said "strengthen your brothers" (Lk 22:32) came right to the heart of this ancient empire. He was directed to this city by the almighty hand of the Lord when he tore him out of the prison of Jerusalem, out of Herod's chains.
In the enclosure of the Conclave, after the election, I thought: what shall I say to the Romans when I present myself before them as their Bishop, coming from a distant country, from Poland? The figure of St Peter then came into my mind. And this is what I thought: Nearly two thousand years ago, also your ancestors accepted a Newcomer; so you, too, will welcome another now: you will welcome also John Paul II, as you once welcomed Peter of Galilee.
It is useless, perhaps, to return to this subject when the succession of circumstances has confirmed with what cordiality you have welcomed a non-Italian Pope, after so many centuries. I wish, therefore, to give thanks in the first place to God, and then also to you for the great-heartedness shown to me before and now. And just today I wish to respond to your welcome in a special way.
For this reason I am going to your Patron Saints, to Assisi, the city of St Francis, and to the tomb of St Catherine of Siena, which is, as you know, in the Basilica of Santa Maria sopra Minerva in Rome. Unfortunately, sunset in the month of November does not permit me to go also to Siena on the same day, as I would have so much liked. In this way John Paul II intends to take his place in the history of salvation, imprinted, so eloquently and abundantly, on the history of Italy and on various places in this country.
Italy! Rome! These names have always been close and dear to me. The history of Poland, the history of the Church in my country, are full of events which brought Rome and Italy close to me and made them dear to me, I would say made them mine.
Krakow, the city from which I come, is often called "the Polish Rome". I hope that, coming from the "Polish Rome" I shall be able, as Bishop of Rome, to serve everyone, under the protection of the Mother of the Church and of your Patron Saints, but especially to serve this beloved land of yours and the people who have welcomed me with such goodwill.
Let us recite the "Angelus".
Let us pray for Rome and for Italy. Let us recommend in prayer all the inhabitants of this land so blessed by God.
Let us recommend also all its dead, all those who fell and all the missing, victims of the war.
    © Copyright 1978 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana 
JOHN PAUL II
 ANGELUS
Wednesday, 1 November 1978
Solemnity of All Saints
  Today I ask, in a quite special way, you who are gathered here to recite the "Angelus" with me, to stop for a moment to reflect on the mystery of the liturgy of the day.
The Church lives in a great perspective. This perspective accompanies her always, moulds her continually, and directs her towards eternity. The liturgy of the day highlights the eschatological reality, a reality which springs from the whole plan of salvation and at the same time from man's history, a reality which gives the very existence of the Church and her mission their ultimate meaning.
That is why we live so intensely the solemnity of All Saints, as well as, tomorrow, the Commemoration of all the dead. These two days enclose, in a particular way, faith in "eternal life" (the last words of the apostolic "Creed").
And although these two days put before the eyes of our soul the inevitability of death, they give, at the same time, a testimony of life . Man who, according to the laws of nature, is "condemned to death", man who lives in the perspective of the annihilation of his body, exists at the same time in the perspective of future life, and is called to joy.
The solemnity of All Saints puts before the eyes of our faith all those who have already reached the fullness of their call to union with God. The day that commemorates the dead directs our thoughts towards those who, having left this world, are waiting in expiation to reach that fullness of love which union with God requires.
These are two great days for the Church which, in a certain way, "prolongs her life" in her saints, and also in all those who have prepared for this life by serving truth and love.
And therefore the Church, in the first days of November, is united in a special way with her Redeemer who, through his death and his resurrection, brought us into the very reality of this life.
And at the same time he made us "a kingdom of priests" for his Father.
And just today I, too, in meditation, thank the Lord for the thirty­two years of priesthood which fall precisely on the solemnity of All Saints.
And so, to our common prayer, I will add a special intention for priestly vocations in the Church of the whole world. I appeal to Christ to call many young men and say to them: "Come and follow me". And I ask the young men not to put up resistance, not to answer "no". I ask everyone to pray and collaborate for vocations.
The harvest is a great one.
The feast of All Saints tells us just how abundant the harvest is.
Not the harvest of death, but of salvation. Not the harvest of the world, a passing image, but the harvest of Christ, which lasts for ever.
Let us recite together the " Angelus".
       © Copyright 1978 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 29 October 1978 
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
Here we are again, meeting as we did a week ago to recite the "Angelus" together. This week has passed quickly, rich in important meetings and visits.
Today, the last Sunday of October, I wish to draw your attention to the Rosary. In fact, throughout the whole Church, October is the month dedicated to the Rosary.
The Rosary is my favourite prayer. A marvellous prayer! Marvellous in its simplicity and in its depth. In this prayer we repeat many times the words that the Virgin Mary heard from the Archangel, and from her kinswoman Elizabeth. The whole Church joins in these words. It can be said that the Rosary is, in a certain way, a prayer-commentary on the last chapter of the Constitution "Lumen Gentium" of Vatican II, a chapter which deals with the wonderful presence of the Mother of God in the mystery of Christ and the Church.
In fact, against the background of the words "Ave Maria" there pass before the eyes of the soul the main episodes in the life of Jesus Christ. They are composed altogether of the joyful, sorrowful and glorious mysteries, and they put us in living communion with Jesus through—we could say—his Mother's heart.
At the same time our heart can enclose in these decades of the Rosary all the facts that make up the life of the individual, the family, the nation, the Church and mankind. Personal matters and those of one's neighbour, and particularly of those who are closest to us, who are dearest to us. Thus the simple prayer of the Rosary beats the rhythm of human life.
During the last few weeks I have had the opportunity to meet many persons, representatives of various nations and of different environments, as well as of various Christian Churches and communities. I wish to assure you that I have not failed to translate these relations into the language of the Rosary prayer, in order that everyone might find himself at the heart of the prayer which gives a full dimension to everything.
In these last weeks both I and the Holy See have had numerous proofs of goodwill from people in the whole world. I wish to translate my gratitude into decades of the Rosary in order to express it in prayer, as well as in the human manner; in this prayer so simple and so rich.
Yesterday afternoon I went down to the crypt of the Vatican Basilica to celebrate Mass for the month's mind of my predecessor, Pope John Paul I; and yesterday—as you well know—there occurred also the twentieth anniversary of the election of Pope John XXIII, whose paternal figure is ever alive in the hearts of the faithful.
John XXIII was a Pope who loved much and who was intensely loved. Let us remember him in prayer, and above all, let us seek to put into practice the precious legacy of the teachings he left us with his word, with his commitment of fidelity to tradition and of "aggiornamento", with his life, and with his holy death.
Now, let us recite together the "Angelus".
.
© Copyright 1978 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 5 August 1979
  I. The Angelus—a prayer that recalls to our memory the mystery of the Incarnation of the Son of God—also calls up in those who recite it the memory of the dead. If this has always been so, it is far more the case today, when this memory is particularly alive here, in Castel Gandolfo. In fact, a year ago, on the solemnity of the Transfiguration of the Lord, on 6 August the difficult and laborious life of Pope Paul VI ended just here at Castel Gandolfo. Tomorrow, at about 9 p.m., will be the first anniversary of that great Pope's death. And therefore we wish today, on the eve of this anniversary, to dedicate to him, particularly, the "Angelus" prayer.
Contemplating the mystery of the Incarnation of the Son of God, let us not forget that this mystery illuminates the darkness of every man's earthly pilgrimage, especially his last days, which are marked by the suffering of the death agony. We die in Christ, who overcame death and opened the prospect of eternal life. A year ago, Paul VI left this world with the certainty of the faith which he proclaimed and with which his earthly life was imbued up to his last moments. Those who had the possibility to be with him in the last instants of his life, here at Castel Gandolfo, remember and testify to that death, so painful on the human plane, but imbued with such strength o f faith in Christ. "Pretiosa in conspectu Domini mors sanctorum eius" ("Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints" Psalm 116 [115], 15).
2. Today, on the eve of the first anniversary of that death, we wish, all together, to commend the late Pope's soul to Christ the Lord who is "Everlasting Father" (Is 9:5), asking for him that peace which only Christ can give.
We also wish to glorify and thank the Holy Trinity for that life—of more than eighty years—up to the end and unreservedly, so full of service for the Church and for mankind. It seems that this was the most ardent wish of the deceased: to be able to serve up to the end and to depart at the right moment, without disturbing anyone with his own person. Although sadness and mourning came over all of us after his death, nevertheless we thanked and still thank the Lord today for answering the prayer of his servant and vicar on earth; because He granted him, with an impressive death, to complete his life-work and launch in this way his last message of love, humility, and offering to the Church and to the world.
"Gloria Dei—vivens homo": The glory of God is living man (St Irenaeus, Adversus Haereses, IV, 20.7). The glory of God is also man's death, in which the dawn of eternal life is revealed.

Addressing the representatives of the Secular Institute "Volontarie di Don Bosco" (Volunteers of Don Bosco), the Holy Father said:
1. I wish to address a word of greeting to the Representatives of the Secular Institute "Voluntarie di Don Bosco," present here with us for this moment of prayer. Beloved daughters, may your commitment of complete consecration to God, in the spirit of the message of St John Bosco, become true Christian witness in your environment of work and of life. I accompany you with my blessing.
To the teachers and pupils of the International Institute of Sciences of Education, John Paul II addressed the following words:
2. And now a greeting also to the teachers and pupils of the International Institute of Sciences of Education. Beloved daughters, may your didactic and educative work always be guided by the light that shines forth from the mystery of the Incarnation, thanks to which "the Son of God has united himself in some fashion with every man" (Past. Const. Gaudium et Spes, 22), conferring on everyone an incomparable dignity. May my Apostolic Blessing sustain you in your high mission.
To the young guests of the Salesian holiday camp at Canneto, the Pope said:
3. An affectionate greeting to you too, dear boys of the city of Cagliari, who are spending your holidays under the guidance of the Salesian Priests.
Take advantage of this period of rest to fortify your spirit too. Try, therefore, with the help of divine grace, always to be good, joyful and generous.
Finally, the Holy Father addressed the teams taking part in the international motorboat Gran Premio of Castel Gandolfo, to be held on Lake Albano that afternoon:
4. Present at this Sunday meeting are also the pilots, technicians and managers of the International Motorboat Gran Premio of Castel Gandolfo, which is being held today on Lake Albano.
My cordial greetings to you all.
You desired this meeting with the Pope, and I thank you for your cordiality and your sympathy. I wish all of you success in sport, and, at the same time, I exhort you to be always full of energy and enthusiasm also in the noble competition of goodness and honesty.
I willingly impart my Blessing to everyone
  © Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 29 July 1979
1. We meet again here, at Castel Gandolfo, for the Angelus. Taking advantage of the hospitality of the inhabitants, we are here to pray and reflect in common on the love that God revealed to man by becoming incarnate. Mary of Nazareth was and will remain for ever the first witness of this love, the first witness of the mystery of the Incarnation. We address her, particularly, with this common prayer and, together with her, we wish to meditate on the mystery of the Incarnation of the Son of God.
2. In this mystery we wish today to feel all sick and suffering people particularly close to us. There will certainly be some also here at Castel Gandolfo. I take advantage of this circumstance to greet them specially. Everywhere, in every village, in every town, large or small, in every country, in every continent, there are, as is known, men who are suffering.
There are sick people, seriously ill, incurable, invalids; persons condemned to move with the help of a wheelchair; men and women tied to a bed of pain.
Perhaps it is just in this period of the year, in which the healthy enjoy a time of rest in the mountains, in the woods, by the sea and the lakes, that our suffering brothers feel their state more painfully. These simple and rightful joys of life, the fascination of summer, rest, and the open air, are limited, very limited for them, and sometimes even inaccessible.
3. When we reflect on the immensity of human suffering, that suffering that is in our midst, in our homes, in the hospitals, in the nursing homes, everywhere in the world, then the meaning of Christ's words "As you did it to one of the least of these my brethren... (my suffering brethren) you did it to me" (Mt 25:40), becomes extremely real. How much Christ is multiplied through these words! How much he is present in the history of mankind! And how many people in the world "are doing something for him", without even realizing it, not even knowing that he exists...
4. We, too, through our reflection, wish to do something for our suffering brothers and sisters. Just the very fact of remembering them is already an act. We dedicate our meeting today, on the occasion of the Angelus, to them: and to memory we join prayer, and to prayer memory. This is, in fact, the prayer in which God's love for man is revealed in every time. God revealed his love for man by becoming incarnate: "The Word became flesh" (Jn 1:14).
And so, embracing with our thought all our suffering brothers and sisters, we wish them to become aware above all of God's love for man. May it show itself to them to be stronger than suffering. May it illuminate the darkness of their hard fate.
We ask it for all our suffering brothers through Mary, Mother of the Word Incarnate. She understood this love more than anyone and she knows how to bring it closer to every man.
Let us pray that she will bring it closer to all the suffering.
5. Today I cannot but express my deep anxiety and concern about the fate of the group of persons of the Catholic Mission of Marymount, in Rhodesia-Zimbabwe, who were kidnapped some days ago. Among them there is a Jesuit laybrother and six Sisters of a local Congregation.
So far little news has arrived. In thought I am close to these brothers and sisters of ours, trusting that there will be consoling news about their condition.
I deeply hope that they will all be able to return soon to their beneficial human and Christian activity, carried out in favour of the local peoples, as many other missionaries are generously doing, some of whom have recently offered even their lives for love of Christ.
Therefore I warmly urge you to pray that the Lord may touch the hearts of those responsible for this act, and grant our humble but pressing prayer for the return of peace and tranquillity among those sorely-tried peoples.
To Special Groups:
It is right that the first word of greeting should go today to the Indo-Chinese refugees, who have arrived in Rome in the last few days, and who are represented here by a group composed mainly of children.
I greet them with special intensity of affection and I am certain that I am expressing the sentiments of the whole Catholic community in welcoming them among us and wishing them a satisfactory settlement in Italy.
May the Lord assist them, comfort them and help them to find among this hospitable people a future of hope and tranquillity.
I wish to address a cordial greeting and good wishes to the many young rowers, who are taking part these days in the boat races on the delightful Albano Lake, on the initiative of the Regional Committee of Latium of the Italian Boat Racing Federation.
Dear young people, your presence offers me the welcome opportunity to congratulate you on your noble and exalting sporting activity, when it is marked by a real sporting spirit and brotherly loyalty; and to express my good wishes not only for success in your races but also in your lives.
May the invoked blessing descend, copious and propitiating, on all of you athletes, on your trainers and technicians, on the members of your families present here and on the whole large family of your well-deserving Federation.
I then greet heartily the children who have wished to come to this prayer appointment from Canneto, where they are in a holiday camp run by the Salesian Fathers.
Always be cheerful and good, dear children. May the Lord assist you and my blessing accompany you.
I greet in particular all the families of Castel Gandolfo, the faithful of the parishes, the Sisters and all the guests who are certainly not lacking in this place in order to find rest, relaxation and moments of piety. I thank you and I wish you a happy holiday.
© Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 22 July 1979
  1. I wish to greet cordially all those present here at this hour of midday: inhabitants of Castel Gandolfo, strangers and pilgrims, who wish to recite the Angelus with me and to meditate devoutly on the mystery of the Incarnation of the eternal Word.
This mystery sheds a great light on man's life. It i s necessary to return to it continually, in order that life may keep for us the value that God gave it, by creating man in his own image and likeness and subsequently himself becoming a man among men. May the light of this truth never stop being the guiding idea of the whole of our earthly existence.
2. Allow me now to turn my thought to children. To your children, to all children, both those who have come here this morning and those who have stayed at home, and finally all children in the world. May every child be present here before the eyes of our heart, like the child that Jesus once put in front of his disciples, uttering these memorable words: "Unless you turn and become like children, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven" (Mt 18:3).
Christ attached enormous importance to the child. He made the latter almost the spokesman of the cause proclaimed by Him and for which He gave his life. He made the child a representative, the simplest one, of this cause, almost a prophet of this. The value of the child in every society lies in the fact that he bears witness to the innocence conceived by the Creator and Father for man. Lost with sin, this innocence must be regained laboriously by each of us. In this labour, in this effort of the intellect, of the will and of the heart, the image of the child is for man an inspiration and source of hope. God who, as Father, calls us all to his own house, will help us to regain the innocence of the child.
3. The child is a source of hope. He speaks to his parents of the purpose of their lives, he represents the fruit of their love. He also makes it possible to think of the future. Parents live for their children; they work and toil for them. And not only in the family, but also in every society the child makes people think of the future. In children the nation sees its own future, just as the Church sees her own future in them.
And it is therefore a good thing that the current year is for the whole world the year of the child. Remembering that, I wish, together with you, to embrace with my thought all children, wherever they may be. Many of them, taking advantage of the holidays, are certainly staying at the various holiday resorts (at least as regards that part of the globe which is now in summer). They are enjoying the fascination of nature, they are enjoying the water, the woods, the mountains. The heavenly Father lets them have a good rest. According to the model of the Son of God, may they grow "in wisdom and in stature, and in favour with God and man" (Lk 2:52). Let them not cease to reawaken in us human hope and also that hope of the kingdom of God, which Christ has opened for those who become like them (cf. Mt 18:3). May they help us to remember that the kingdom of God is in our midst (cf. Lk 17:20).
We will come back on other occasions to talking about children.
4. Reciting the Angelus now, let us not forget our brothers and sisters and, in particular, children, who are refugees. As you know, the international Conference on Indo-Chinese refugees was concluded yesterday. You all know of the tragedy which is taking place in distant South-East Asia: the fate of those unfortunate people is a challenge to the conscience of all, and makes it binding on everyone to do everything in his power to bring help.
Let us imitate the example of the Good Samaritan, who assisted the person found by the wayside (cf. Lk 10:34).
Let us pray to the Holy Mother of God to take under the protection of her love those brothers of ours who, in the midst of dangers that are often mortal, are looking for a land to receive them. Let us also pray that the offers made at Geneva by the various countries—with an emulation worthy of praise—may find an effective and prompt application with the collaboration of all parties.
There is, in fact, only one answer to the drama of the refugees: the answer of love.
After the recitation of the Angelus John Paul II greeted the priests taking part in the General Chapter of the Piarists, thanking them for having offered a house to young Poles of the OAS I movement. There are the Pope's words:
I address a special greeting to the Piarist Fathers, who are holding their General Chapter at Ariccia these days, and have come to this prayer meeting today. I willingly wish them good work, so as to put this ancient religious Family more and more in the service of the holy Church, with increased dedication, in conformity with the Gospel and in the genuine spirit of their Founder.
The Pope addressed the Venezuelan Choir as follows:
I now wish to address a cordial greeting to the group of students who form the Choir of Caracas.
Many thanks for your songs. Make the art of music a means of praise to God and of spiritual and human elevation for yourselves and for others. In order that this may be so, I commend you to the Lord in prayer and I give you my Blessing.
 
© Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS

St. Peter's Square
Sunday, 15 July 1979

1. Today I wish to draw the attention of those taking part in this common midday prayer, to all the men who till the land, that is, to farmers. Yesterday I met the participants in the World Conference for Agrarian Reform and Rural Development. This great meeting organized by FAO puts before our eyes the considerable number of men who serve the cause of supplying their neighbour with food in a simple but fundamental way, that is, the men who till the land: it is precisely they, in fact, who feed us. For this reason we owe them constant gratitude and lasting memory of their hard work. Respect for their profession requires not only that it should find social recognition, but that it should also bring farmers due remuneration, and create adequate conditions for their sustenance and the maintenance of their families.
The Apostolic See has dedicated a great deal of attention to this problem. This is testified by pontifical Documents of great importance, such as, for example, the Encyclicals "Mater et Magistra", "Populorum Progressio", and Paul VI's address to the World Food Conference in 1974. As regards agricultural work, I have already expressed myself more than once, especially on the occasion of the journeys to Mexico and to Poland.
The problem of a fair attitude with regard to agricultural work can never slip our attention, because of its fundamental importance for the everyday life of the whole of society. Nor can we neglect the problem of the rural world, especially in Third World countries, where the vast majority of the population live off the land and depend on it for their own development.
The conditions of the rural world and of farm work are very different in the various countries, and the social position of farm workers varies greatly. That certainly depends on the degree of development of technique in agriculture, but it also depends on just rights and on the laws of agricultural policy, on the level of the whole of social ethics. We must wish all farmers in the world that their work, so precious, will never be accompanied by the unjust feeling of being outsiders socially! The exodus of men from agricultural work can be explained to a certain extent by the progress of technique, but it is caused also by situations that are objectively unjust, as a result of which rural people do not have, in concrete circumstances, the possibility of assuring themselves a minimum standard of living. It would be worse if this exodus were to be caused by other reasons, lowering the social status of farm workers.
It is not possible, in this short talk, to refer to all the important arguments connected with this subject. I wish, however, that in this invitation to prayer all men who till the land may find the confirmation of that esteem which the Church has for their work, and which she draws from Christ. It cannot be otherwise, if we remember that Christ once described God, His Father, as "the vinedresser" (Jn 15:1). And therefore, expressing our respect for all farm workers in every country of the world, let us pray to God" the vinedresser", our heavenly Father, to bless their work, protect it from natural calamities which can destroy its fruit, so that they may be happy to serve their neighbour, supplying him with the necessary foodstuffs. And let us also pray that he may bless the efforts of all those engaged, at the national and international level, in the advancement and prosperity of the rural world.
2. I call upon you all to pray for a country which is living days of tragic internal tension, Nicaragua. As Father of everyone, it is incumbent on me to appeal for peace, to invoke solidarity and aid for the suffering people, for the population which has been suffering hardships of every kind for weeks and weeks and has now reached the limits of its physical and moral resistance. My thought goes to the many, the too many, deaths which the conflict between brothers is causing, and particularly to the helpless and innocent victims, among whom there are many old people and children; without mentioning the looting and destruction that have devastated the main cities and other towns, the growing shortage of food, medicines and essential aid.
Such a dramatic situation—which recalls the not far distant days of the terrible earthquake, with the aggravating circumstance that now it is not just destruction but the hatred and divisions which the struggle is continually increasing, that weigh on souls—must already stimulate our ardent invocation to the Lord that Nicaragua may be spared other days of suffering and that, with goodwill, a solution of justice and true social peace may be found.

© Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 8 July 1979
  Beloved Brothers and Sisters,
1. The solemnity of the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul, which we celebrated some days ago, enables us to recall another passage from the Acts of the Apostles. When Peter had been imprisoned by Herod in Jerusalem and risked the death penalty, then—as we read—"earnest prayer for him was .made to God by the church" (Acts 12:5). Prayer then led to Peter's mysterious liberation from prison.
This phrase of the Acts of the Apostles on the Church, which prayed earnestly for Peter, has a significance which is not only historical. In it is expressed the permanent practice of the Church herself which, as she prayed for Peter, in the same way prays earnestly for his Successors. She does so at every holy Mass, recalling in the canon the name of the present Successor of St Peter. She does so also on other occasions and in other ways. Prayer for Peter has become, in a certain sense, the first model of the prayer of the Church, for his Successors. At the same time, this prayer expresses love of the Church and a sense of responsibility for the cause of the Gospel, which the Church assumes under the guidance of Peter and his Successors.
2. In the course of the whole year, I receive so many proofs of affection on the part of my brothers and sisters, from everyone. During the last few weeks, especially around the feast of SS Peter and Paul, they have been particularly numerous. So I wish to express my gratitude to all my benefactors, known to me, at least through correspondence, and also to those unknown to me.
I wish to reciprocate with daily prayer for all those who pray for me and sometimes offer great spiritual sacrifices for my service, for the successful accomplishment of the tasks entrusted to me by Christ the Lord, for the grace of fruitful service for the Church.
Prayer is an invisible bond, which unites the Communities of the faithful. It is a very strong and deep bond. The spiritual unity of the People of God is expressed in it.
The gift of prayer is a special gift. It is a gift that involves a deep obligation. On this occasion today I thought I should express it publicly.
The gift of prayer, which I receive from so many brothers and sisters of mine, is a source of continual strengthening. Christ, who exhorted Peter: "strengthen your brethren" (Lk 22:3), based this exhortation on his own prayer. He said: "I have prayed for you that your faith may not fail" (Lk 22:32). And when the difficult moment came, he gave him that strengthening of which we read in the Acts of the Apostles: the Church prayed for Peter.
And this great service cannot be exercised in any other way but on the basis of the deep certainty of faith, coming from Christ's words once addressed to Peter, and, at the same time, on the basis of the prayer of the whole Church.
For this prayer I wish to thank everyone and each one in particular on this special circumstance today.                                                                                                                                                 
Let all of you remember that I always think of you as my benefactors.
  © Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 1 July 1979
  I wish today, on the occasion of our Sunday meeting, to bear witness to the joy of the whole church at the creation of the new Cardinals.
In their persons the Roman Church binds herself, I would say, with new links (cardo) to her internal structure. As St Paul teaches, we are "built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus himself being the cornerstone" (Eph 2:20).
On this cornerstone and on this foundation may the service of our Brothers be constructed, a service connected with the dignity of the cardinalate which they have received.
Congratulating them, we address these good wishes to them with our whole heart. We are glad that since yesterday this dignity has been conferred on such well-deserving Prelates of the Roman Curia, beginning with the illustrious Secretary of State. Together with him there have entered the College of Cardinals: the President of the Administration of the Property of the Apostolic See; the Secretary of the Sacred Congregation for the Bishops, who was also Secretary of two conclaves; the Secretary General of the Synod of Bishops, who, since the institution of the Synod, has been the first to discharge this office with great dedication for twelve years now. To this group must be added also the Apostolic Nuncio who, after having served the Holy See, passes to the College of Cardinals from his last posting in Paris.
At the same time we greet with joy and hope, in this group, the representatives of the episcopates of the various countries and continents. May that link (cardo) which unites St Peter's See with the Church extended among so many nations of the earth, be strengthened even more, through their nomination.
We rejoice therefore that representatives of the following nations have now become members of the College of Cardinals: Italy, France, Ireland, Poland, Mexico, Canada, Vietnam and Japan. The Roman See shares the joy of the episcopal sees from which these revered Pastors, so dear to us, come: Turin, Venice, Marseilles, Armagh, Krakow, Mexico City, Toronto, Hanoi and Nagasaki.
May the power of the Holy Spirit and love of the Mother of the Church, of Mary Mother of God, accompany them always.
May the People of God and the whole human family enjoy peace and respect for the dignity of every man and of every nation.
Above all may God himself be worshipped.
    © Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 24 June 1979
  1. The Heart of the Redeemer vivifies the whole Church and draws men who have opened their hearts to the "unfathomable riches" of this one Heart.
By means of today's meting and by means of the Angelus of this last Sunday of the month of June, I wish, in a special way, to unite spiritually with all those whose human hearts are inspired by this Divine Heart. This family is a large one. Not a few Congregations, Associations and Communities develop in the Church and, in a programmatic way, draw the vital energy of their activity from the Heart of Christ.
This spiritual bond always leads to a great awakening of apostolic zeal. Adorers of the Divine Heart become when it is granted to them to have relations with the Heart of our Lord and Master, in them also there then springs up the need of atonement for the sins of the world, for the indifference of so many hearts and their negligences.
How necessary this host of watchful hearts is in the Church in order that the Love of the Divine Heart may not remain isolated and unrequited! Among this host special mention deserves to go to all those who offer their sufferings as living victims in union with the Heart of Christ, pierced on the cross. Thus transformed with love, human suffering becomes a particular leaven of Christ's work of salvation in the Church.
2. Today, in St Peter's Basilica, a large number of Deacons will receive priestly ordination from my hands. There are 88 of them, and they come from the following countries: the Philippines, Vietnam, Poland, Malta, Zaire, Rwanda, Argentina, Mexico, United States, Canada, Ireland, Portugal, Spain, France and Italy.
Many of them have had the possibility of carrying out their theological studies and preparation for the priesthood in Rome, in "the Roman Colleges" which gather priests and seminarians from different countries in the world.
Today, conferring Holy Orders on them I wish to unite them even more deeply with the heart of the Church, which beats in unison with the Divine Heart of Christ, the Eternal Priest.
May they persevere in this union, bearing the blessed fruits of the evangelical message and the priestly ministry.
I commend to the Divine Heart also the Families, dioceses or Religious Congregations to which they belong, and, finally, their Roman Colleges and their Seminaries. I wish the latter a fervent and truly evangelical life which begins from the Heart of Jesus.
  © Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 17 June 1979 
  1. "Et Verbum caro factum est et habitavit in nobis".
Today we wish to adore in a particular way the Divine Body, which became the Blessed Sacrament of our faith and of the whole faith of the Church. This is the day of public cult of the Eucharist. The expression of this cult, accepted for whole centuries, is the procession: a religious procession led by the High Priest and, at the same time, the Most Holy Sacrifice, who invites us to follow him.
Let us remember that the place of Christ's presence on earth was not only the Upper Room in Jerusalem, but also the streets of towns and country roads. Everywhere people gathered before him. They gathered together to be able to be with him, to listen to him.
In the solemnity of Corpus Christi this particular presence of Christ in the streets, squares, and by the wayside, is renewed. He speaks to us who have gathered, not with the living words of the Gospel, as he once did, but with the eloquent silence of the Eucharist.
In this silence of the white Host, carried in the ostensory, are all his words; there is his whole life given in offering to the Father for each of us; there is also the glory of the glorified body, which started with the resurrection, and still continues in heavenly union.
Let us try to participate in the public cult of Corpus Christi so that the mystery of Christ may penetrate our whole life even more deeply.
2. Tomorrow, Monday 18 June, the second Agreement, called Salt II, on the limitation of strategic armaments, will be signed at Vienna by the major nuclear powers. The agreement is not yet a reduction of armaments or, as would be desirable, a provision for disarmament. But that does not mean that the measures laid down are not a sign, which we must hail with satisfaction, of the desire to continue a dialogue, without which all hope of working effectively for peace could vanish.
Believers, and men of goodwill, who feel it an imperative of conscience to commit themselves as "peacemakers", cannot ignore the importance of everything that fosters an atmosphere of détente, propitious to encourage other and indispensable steps forward along the way to the limitation and reduction of armaments.
Together with you, I pray to the Lord, who wished to give us in the Holy Eucharist a pledge not only of future glory but of peace and brotherly communion on this earth, to bring about the progress of the great cause of the renunciation of arms and the continuation of honest, stable, and effective agreements; a premise to the strengthening of concord and to more just relations among peoples. In this perspective of hope, the Vienna meeting is an event which cannot but be at the centre of our prayer.
3. I think now with deep sadness of the painful ordeal to which the helpless population of Nicaragua has been subjected for some time: this dear and tormented land, from which tragic news continues to arrive, testifying to the prevalence of hatred over love, of violence over the spirit of concord and brotherhood.
To prayer for the souls of the victims of such a cruel situation, let us unite fervent imploration to God to illuminate the minds of those on whom responsibility for the atrocious conflict weighs heaviest, to instil courage in all those who, though living in danger and difficulties, have the duty of opening the hearts of all to hope, and to give the whole people of Nicaragua better days in refound peace and brotherhood.
4. Finally, on this Sunday meeting of ours for the recitation of the Angelus, I recall again with great emotion my recent journey in Poland: it was a pilgrimage of faith, which I lived intensely and which the Polish people also lived intensely with me. I prayed for the Church, for mankind, for you, in the places sacred to the religious history of my country of origin, and I entrusted the Church, mankind and you to Our Lady of Jasna Gora. At this moment I wish to address a special thought of satisfaction and gratitude to all those Bishops and faithful who, from various parts of the world, carried out this extra­ordinary pilgrimage with the Pope, as well as all those who would have liked to be present, but were not able for various reasons, and accompanied the Pilgrim Pope with their fervent prayer and hidden sacrifices.
My sincere and hearty thanks to everyone!
  © Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
APOSTOLIC PILGRIMAGE TO POLAND
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Marian Shrine of Czestochowa
Tuesday, 5 June 1979
  1. In Rome there is a beautiful custom that on every Sunday and holy day the Pope recites the Angelus with the faithful gathered in Saint Peter's Square. I inherited this custom from my venerable predecessors and I continue it with great joy. The prayer is preceded by a short meditation and a mention of certain events which need to be particularly recommended to God in prayer, and we conclude with a blessing.
My fellow-countrymen in Poland are acquainted with this Roman practice. In fact, from the time I was called to the Chair of Peter, they began spontaneously to join with me in reciting the Angelus every day at the usual hours of the morning, at midday and in the evening. The recitation of this prayer has become a universal practice, testified to by numerous letters and frequent mention in the press. Through the Angelus we are spiritually linked together, we remember each other and we share the mystery of salvation and our hearts also.
Today, while reciting the Angelus at Jasna Gora, I wish to thank all my fellow-countrymen in all of Poland for their worthy initiative. I have always been deeply moved by your constant remembrance of me and now I wish to express this feeling publicly.
2. At the same time, I wish, together with you my dear brothers and sisters, to ask our Most Holy Mother that the praying of the Angelus may be a constant reminder to one and all of how great is the dignity of man. This, in fact, is the fruit and the goal of this prayer. Remembering that "the Word became flesh", that is, that the Son of God became man, we must become conscious of how great each man has become through this mystery, through the Incarnation of the Son of God! Christ, in fact, was conceived in the womb of Mary and became man to reveal the eternal love of the Creator and Father and to make known the dignity of each one of us.
If we regularly pray the Angelus, this prayer must influence all our conduct. We cannot recite it only with our lips; we cannot repeat the Angelus and at the same time act in a way which clashes with our human and Christian dignity.
I shall not now speak in detail of everything in the attitude of Poles that is opposed to the dignity of "God's image and likeness", the dignity that was confirmed by the mystery of the Incarnation. We know very well the vices that at times become real plagues threatening the spiritual and biological life of the nation. Think of it, dear brothers and sisters.. I heartily beg you to do so.
Continue, then, to recite the Angelus with the Pope. May it bear fruit in every aspect of the life of the Polish people, not only on holy days but every day of their lives.
  © Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA
CÆLI
World Day of Social Communications
 20 May 1979
  Beloved Brothers and Sisters
1.  We are living the extraordinary liturgical period between Ascension and Pentecost. In these days the Church, like the first group of disciples, finds herself mysteriously "in the situation of the Upper Room", remaining perseveringly in prayer "with Mary, the Mother of Jesus" (Acts 1:14). Also this meeting of ours at midday is, on her side, merely a fragment of that remaining united together in prayer.
In the Upper Room, the Church prepares to assume and to carry out the mission received from Christ. It is natural, therefore, that we should turn our thought in the first place to those who will receive Episcopal Ordination in St Peter's Basilica this afternoon. It is a question of twenty-six Prelates, coning from the following countries: Italy, Spain, Bulgaria, Nicaragua, Sudan. Ethiopia, United States of America, Brazil, Norway, Philippines, India, Canada, Chile. Their different origin and their destination are a sign of that same universality of the Church which was already noted at Jerusalem on the day of the first Pentecost.
2.  In the second place, I wish to call your attention to another group of Christians, far more numerous, who are preparing particularly in this period to take part in the mission and apostolate of the Church. I am thinking of the many boys and girls who will approach the Sacrament of Confirmation during the days of Pentecost. We know that in Rome as in the whole Church this Sacrament is received by young Christians at different moments of the liturgical year. However, the period of Pentecost is particularly suitable. In fact, the descent of the Holy Spirit in Confirmation, with his characteristic gifts and fruits, has as its specific aim the formation of mature and responsible Christians, such as the Apostles were at last when they came out of the Upper Room. As for them, also the maturity of Confirmed persons is expressed in conscious and active apostolate, as vigorous witness to the Risen Lord and his Gospel.
And it is here that, in the last analysis, the necessary apostolate of the Laity in the Church is founded. For this reason sound preparation is indispensable, made up of prayer, reflection, and the deepening of faith. Christian life, in fact, cannot be improvised, but requires real and proper conscientization. On its side, the Sacrament received tends by its very nature to be expressed in the life of each one; it will have to lead to greater faithfulness in catechesis, to deeper participation in religious practice, to more consistent behaviour in everyday existence. Therefore, I call upon you to pray intensely for all those boys and girls who will receive the Sacrament of Confirmation, in order that it may really confirm their baptismal commitments in depth, with strength and with joy.
3.  I must also add—as you know, moreover—that today the World Day of Social Communications is celebrated in the whole Church. For this occasion I have already addressed a special Message, which this year, coinciding with the "International Year of the Child", has as its subject: "Social communications for the protection and development of childhood in the family and in society". The subject is an important one and deserves to be considered attentively. I call upon you all, therefore, to raise a special prayer to the Lord, to obtain a sense of responsibility and wisdom for all those who operate in this delicate sector.
4.   I cannot but remember at this moment, with deep affliction, the young Somalian Amhed Ali Giama, who was barbarously burnt alive some days ago, just near the church of St Mary of Peace. How can such atrocious episodes occur, here, in Rome, the home of law, the city of St Peter? While I express my own and your deepest censure of this inhuman act, I call upon everyone to raise prayers to the Lord for our brother, a son of beloved Africa.
After reciting the Marian prayer, the Holy Father addressed as follows a group of young people from the diocese of Verona.
I now address a special greeting to the many thousands of adolescents of the diocese of Verona, who are at this moment linked up with us by radio from the historic amphitheatre of their beautiful city. They are gathered there with their Bishop, His Excellency Mons. Giuseppe Amari, and with their priests to conclude a year of study and reflection on the stimulating subject proposed by the Italian Episcopal Conference, "Evangelization and community".
Beloved boys and girls, I express to you my sincere satisfaction at the commitment you have shown on the path of faith undertaken on a community basis this year, dedicating yourselves to study Christ's message and endeavouring to put it into practice consistently. Remember that the efficacy of the proclamation which you bring to others depends on the intensity with which you live the communion with Christ and with the brethren. Love Jesus, therefore, and love the Church, with sincerity, dedication and joy. Here lies the secret of witness that is able to penetrate into hearts.
May my blessing accompany you.
After imparting the Blessing, the Holy Father referred to his forthcoming journey to Poland as follows:
I remind you of my imminent journey to Poland, my native land, on the occasion of the ninth Centenary of the martyrdom of St Stanislaus. I will be in that dear country from 2 to 10 June next. And I call upon you to pray for this too, in order that this apostolic pilgrimage may be guided by the light and the power of the Holy Spirit for the good of the Church, especially for the good of my fellow-countrymen, and also of other Christians and all men of goodwill.
  © Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA
CÆLI
Sixth Sunday of Easter, 20 May 1979
Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Our usual Sunday prayer has a special reason and content today. In Rome, in fact, this Sunday is dedicated to the "Day for new churches and for religious assistance for the outskirts of the City", and I do not want to pass over this important occasion in silence. Yes, Rome, too, needs new churches, in spite of the many ancient ones already present in its historic centre. It is the new districts which call for these constructions, so that they may be living centres of both Christian and human aggregation. As I said in my visit to the Parish of St Joseph's at Forte Boccea last March, "the material edifice in which the faithful people gathers to listen to the Word of God and take part in celebration of the divine ministries, represents a factor of primary importance for the growth and consolidation of that community of faith, hope and love that the parish is" ("L'Osservatore Romano", 20-21 March 1979).
I exhort all of you, therefore, to take this problem to heart, both in prayer and with concrete help.
Continuing in Polish, the Holy Father said:
2. I wish to greet once again my fellow-countrymen who have come from so many countries and continents where they live as emigrants. Brothers and sisters, since your arrival is in connection with the jubilee of St Stanislaus, allow me to re-read part of the Apostolic Letter which, for this jubilee, I sent to the whole Church in Poland. St Stanislaus has left a special heritage, "namely, it is this heritage of faith, hope, and charity which gives to the life of man and of society its full and proper motivation. It is a heritage of firmness and courage in professing the truth which shows the dignity of the human mind. It is a heritage of concern for the salvation and the spiritual and temporal good of our neighbour, namely, of the citizens of the same nation and of all whom we should constantly serve. It is also a heritage of freedom in a spirit of service and of the giving of oneself out of love. Finally, it is the wonderful tradition of relationship and unity. The facts show that Saint Stanislaus, his cult, and especially his canonization, contributed to the accomplishment of this in the history of the Polish people."
The Church in Poland "desires to remind herself of this heritage. She wants to ponder it more deeply and to draw from it some considerations relevant to daily living. She needs help in fighting against apathy, crime, and sin, which are especially detrimental to the good of the Poles and of Poland. She seeks through a renewed protection to strengthen the faith and hope in the future, so that she may carry out her mission and serve the salvation of one and all."
3. As you already know, the Plenary Session of the Italian Episcopal Conference ended here in Rome on the day before yesterday. It was an important event, because it had as its central subject of reflection and discussion the very topical problem of vocations and seminaries. Everyone knows the recent phenomenon of crisis, which has touched these areas. However, we read with pleasure in the final Document of the Italian Bishops that there are "consoling signs of regained vitality within our Churches" (n. 1), that "groups and movements of generous faith and strong pastoral commitment are flourishing" (ibid.) and that there can be noted "some revival of vocations for the priesthood, such as to hold out the hope that the uneasiness from which Italian Churches, and not only they, have suffered in the last few years, is being overcome" (n. 2).
Let us thank the Lord for this, and commit ourselves even more to offering our responsible contribution in this field. Moreover, let us not forget to pray, as we do now with "Regina Caeli laetare", that these germs of hope may be made more and more fertile and fruitful by divine grace.
  © Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CÆLI
Fifth Sunday of Easter, 13 May 1979
1. At our meeting today to recite the Regina Caeli together, I wish to address the thoughts and hearts of all those present, and of those following us on the radio or television, towards the boys and girls who this year receive Holy Communion for the first time.
I often happen to meet them, either at the Wednesday audiences or on the occasion of pastoral visits to parishes, or in other circumstances. They approach with the simplicity of children, they speak of their forthcoming meeting with Jesus and they prepare for that. So many times they add that they would like to receive First Communion from my hands. These boys and girls are so dear to me; I think they are dear in the same way to all of us. Above all they are dear to the Lord Jesus, who seems to address to them the words that we listen to in the Gospel today: "I am the vine, you are the branches" (Jn 15:5). "Abide in me and I in you" (15:4).
How important in a young Christian's life is the moment in which he is granted for the first time the privilege of becoming a participant in this sacrament in which Jesus has left us the visible sign of his divine love; that love with which he loved us up to death; love which is the greatest expectation of the human heart. When true love takes root in man's heart it becomes his greatest strength and power. It is this love that Christ grafts on to the hearts of children by means of the Sacrament of his Body and of his Blood. 
2. How important it is for all of us that the expectation of so many children's hearts should be fulfilled in this year and that First Communion should constitute for them the beginning of that strength of spirit to which they will be able to refer during the whole of their lives. Precisely for this reason, preparation for First Communion, which in the first place consists in a sound catechesis, is so opportune and necessary.
Going back to my personal pastoral experiences as a young priest, I remember how much joy we found in this preparation, carried out together with the children and their parents. I remember my first parish priest, an elderly man, who always spoke of it as a pastoral task of particular importance. Nor can it be otherwise: by preparing children for First Communion we introduce them into the principal mystery of Christian life. We show how great is man's dignity, his immortal soul, if it can become God's house. Finally, we form in them delicacy of conscience when preparation for First Communion is accompanied by an examination of conscience, repentance of sins, and the sacrament of Penance.
 3. His family must take part responsibly in this important event in the young Christian's life. Let them all, but particularly the parents, give the utmost importance to what is essential, that is, to the strictly religious and sacramental content, so that the exterior aspect of First Communion may not overshadow this content. Let the exterior aspect, necessary though it is, be kept within fitting limits.
First Communion must take place in the parishes of the children who receive it. For, if it is a very important event for the life of a Christian family, it is so also for the life of the parish. Since these parishes are part of the Diocese of Rome, it has been arranged, in agreement with the Cardinal Vicar, that all children who have made First Communion in their respective parishes will meet in St Peter's Square, on 14 June next, the feast of the Body and Blood of the Lord.
I wish to celebrate Holy Mass and distribute Communion to a group of their representatives on the day which is dedicated particularly to the Eucharist. Thus, while the aspiration of those children who would have liked to receive First Communion from me, is satisfied in a way, it will be possible to realize, at the same time, a solemn manifestation of eucharistic worship, in obedience to the liturgical dignity of that stupendous day.
I commend to the prayers of all those present and of all Rome the children who approach the
Lord's Table for the first time this year; and I commend even more all children in the world
who, for some reason, cannot enjoy the happiness of receiving Jesus sacramentally.
4. My thought then returns again to the dear land of Uganda, from which, unfortunately, there continues to arrive painful news of losses of so many human lives, including those of some missionaries killed by violence and hatred while they were carrying out their mission as Gospel workers and servants of brothers. So please join in my prayer for the souls of the victims, and implore from the Lord courage for all those who are still in danger and difficulties. I am close, too, to all the families of missionaries, religious and lay, who are living in concern and anguish. May God grant Uganda and the whole of Africa better days, so that the desired complete development of those peoples may take place in peace and brotherhood.
  © Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CÆLI
Fourth Sunday of Easter, 6 May 1979
  The Church dedicates the fourth Sunday of Easter to the Good Shepherd. This is a very interesting figure, dear to the ancient Church of Rome, as can be seen from so many historical testimonies; it is a figure rich in meaning for those who are familiar with Holy Scripture.
The Good Shepherd is Jesus Christ, the Son of God and of Mary, our Brother and Redeemer; it must be said, in fact, that he is the only, true and eternal shepherd of our souls! While he attributes this title to himself, he takes care to justify the reason and the validity of this personal attribution: only he, in fact, knows his sheep and they know him (cf. Jn 10:14); only he "lays down his life for the sheep" (Jn 10:11); only he guides them and leads them along safe ways; only he defends them from evil, symbolized by the rapacious wolf.
In this wonderful work, however, Christ does not want to be and to act alone, but he intends to associate with himself collaborators—men chosen among men in favour of other men (cf. Heb 5:1). These he calls with a special "vocation" of love, invests with his sacred powers and sends as apostles in the world, so that they may continue his salvific mission, always and everywhere, until the end of time. Christ, therefore, needs, wills to need, the response, the zeal, the love of those who are "called", so that he may still know, guide, defend and love so many other sheep, sacrificing also life for them, if necessary!
And so the fourth Sunday of Easter recalls, together with the image of the Good Shepherd, also those who are chosen and sent to prolong his mission in time and space (bishops and priests), and it also reminds us of the problem of ecclesiastical vocations, a cause of so much hope and anxiety for the Church. Keeping in mind the fact that—as the Council states—"the task of fostering vocations devolves on the whole Christian community" (Optatam Totius, 2), and considering the urgency and seriousness of this problem, the idea arises spontaneously of connecting Good Shepherd Sunday with the need of having recourse to fervent and confident prayer to the Lord. Prayer, in fact, makes it possible continually to rediscover the dimensions of that Kingdom, for the coming of which we pray every day, repeating the words that Christ taught us. Then we realize what our place is in the fulfilment of this supplication: "Thy kingdom come..." When we pray, we shall discover more easily those "fields already white for harvest" (Jn 4:35) and we will understand the meaning of the words that Christ uttered on seeing them: "pray therefore the Lord of the harvest to send out labourers into his harvest" (Mt 9:38).
For the effective and consoling solution of the problem of vocations, the Christian Community must, therefore, feel committed in the first place to pray, to pray a great deal, with confidence and perseverance; not neglecting, furthermore, to promote opportune pastoral initiatives and to offer, particularly by means of "consecrated" souls, a luminous testimony of life lived in faithfulness to the divine vocation. We must exert a gentle pressure on the heart of the Lord, who does us the honour of calling us to collaborate with him for the victory and expansion of his kingdom on earth, in order that "the love of Christ" (2 Cor 5:14) may awaken the divine call in the hearts of very many young people and in other noble and generous souls, induce the hesitant to take a decision, and sustain in perseverance those who have made their choice in the service of God and of the brethren. May God let everyone fully understand that the presence, the quality, the number and the faithfulness of vocations are a sign of the living and active presence of the Church in the world, and a cause for hope for her future.
I address, finally, a special and cordial appeal to the young. Beloved, look at the ideal represented by the figure of the Good Shepherd—an ideal of light, life and love—and, at the same time, consider that our time needs to refer to such ideals. If Christ's eye dwells on you with predilection, if he chooses you, if he calls you to be his collaborators, do not hesitate for a moment—following the example of the Most Holy Virgin to the Angel—to say your generous "Yes". You will not regret it; your joy will be true and full, and your life will appear rich in fruits and in merits, because you will become with him and for him messengers of peace, agents of good, collaborators of God in the salvation of the world!
  © Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CÆLI
Third Sunday of Easter, 29 April 1979
  Beloved Sisters and Brothers!
1. Today is a day of great joy for all of us: the Church venerates two new Blesseds, Francis Coll and Jacques Laval. We have just concluded the solemn liturgical celebration, but I wish to return briefly to these two exceptional figures of witnesses to the Gospel and true catechists in the past century.
Francis Coll, a son of Spain, born at Gombreny, a village in the Catalan Pyrenees, followed the Dominican vocation. When convents were closed by law in that nation in 1835, Francis, always remaining faithful to his religious consecration, dedicated himself to preaching the Word of God, by means of "popular missions", and in August 1856 he founded at Vich the Dominican Sisters of "La Anunciata," devoted particularly to the education of girls. His death took place in April 1875.
Jacques Laval is a son of France. Born at Croth, in the diocese of Evreux, in 1803, he was first a doctor; and after inner struggles, he surrendered finally to the call of Jesus. Ordained priest in 1838, in 1841 he left for the island of Mauritius to dedicate himself to the evangelization of the Blacks, becoming a Mauritian with the Mauritians. He remained in that island—until his death, which took place in 1864—for 23 years, dedicated entirely to proclaiming the Gospel in the midst of difficulties insuperable on the human plane.
The whole Church is exultant at the gift that God has made to her of two other intercessors in heaven and two examples to imitate on earth. It is joy also for me, because Francis Coll and Jacques Laval are the first Blesseds of my Pontificate and I hope they will be my protectors.
At this exalting moment I wish to express hearty congratulations to the two Religious Families, the Dominican Order—which is also celebrating today the liturgical feast of St Catherine of Siena, Patroness of Italy—and the Congregation of the Holy Spirit; they have enriched the Church and humanity and have the immense satisfaction and privilege of having given us these sons of theirs. Nor can we forget to address our thought of sincere applause to their respective countries. Spain and France, and for Blessed Laval also to his country of adoption, the island of Mauritius. The Church is particularly grateful to them for this further, magnificent gift of holiness.
The personalities of the two Blesseds, so rich, so open to the spiritual and social problems of the modern world, urge us to renew the hope that all peoples, all nations, all continents may be represented in the earthly Church, on her way to her fulfilment in eternal glory.
2. The two new Blesseds propose to us again concretely the ever existing urgency of Jesus' mandate to the apostles and to the Church: "Go into all the world and preach the Gospel to the whole creation" (Mk 16:15). In October 1977 the fourth General Assembly of the Synod of Bishops dealt with the subject of "Catechesis in our time with particular reference to children and the young". At the end of the work, the Synod Fathers asked Pope Paul VI of venerated memory to address a document on catechesis to the universal Church. This document should be published within the next few months. Furthermore the Synod Fathers sent to the whole People of God a pressing “Message", in which—among other things—they addressed their grateful appreciation to catechists, in these terms: "There are a great many, men, women, young people and even children, who dedicate their time—generally without any material recompense—in such a serious work as that of constructing the Kingdom of God. Filled with true charity they form Christ Jesus in men's hearts" (cf. "L'Osservatore Romano", English edition, 3 November, 977, p. 6).
3. Mindful of those words, today I address an affectionate greeting, due thanks and keen encouragement to all catechists in the world: priests, religious, Sisters, lay men and women. I turn especially to parents, who are and must be the first, irreplaceable and exemplary catechists of their children, bringing them up from childhood to knowledge and love of Jesus and his message of industrious faith, active charity, universal solidarity. I address a special memory also to all those who teach Religion in schools, in the various countries, and, in particular, in Italy.
My good wishes and my Apostolic Blessing to everyone present!
I would now like to turn my gaze to Africa, a land of so many consolations and hopes for the Church and the Gospel. I am thinking in particular of Uganda, in these days of sore trial for that nation. Let us pray together for the people of Uganda, that they may find tranquillity again, that there will be no more bloodshed, and that there may prevail the spirit of reconciliation, of which the Church would certainly like to be a  sign and, if possible, also an instrument. It is a Church alive and fervent with faith, which has grown luxuriantly owing to the commitment of its bishops, priests and faithful, and to the contribution of so many missionaries, also priests, religious men and women and lay people, come to bring Christ's message. It was learned just yesterday that a Combonian missionary, Father Lorenzo Bono, has been killed. Let us pray for him. Let a special thought go to all workers of the Gospel, uniting ourselves to the feelings of their distant families, which are often in pain and anguish, in these days, because of uncertainty about the fate of their dear ones, and invoking from the Lord that they may get reassuring news of all, even from those territories in which communications are temporarily interrupted.
  © Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CAELI
Second Sunday of Easter, 22 April 1979
  1. "Noli esse incredulus sed fidelis". "Do not be faithless, but believing" (Jn 20:27).
Today, on the Sunday of the octave of Easter, we re-read these words spoken by the Risen Christ to the Apostle Thomas. These words are, in a certain sense, Christ's programme with regard to man.
Here is the programme of faith: "Blessed are those who have not seen and yet believe" (Jn 20:29).
We know why Thomas objected. Because he did not wish to accept the truth about the resurrection. In this he was no different from the other apostles. They had similar difficulties. So much did the fact of the resurrection go beyond the awareness of the necessity of death and the irreversibility of its consequences. This fact was so difficult to imagine. Man, once dead, no longer lives among men, no longer finds his place among the living on earth.
The apostles accepted the reality of the resurrection on the basis of their experience of the Risen Christ. They saw him, after death, among the living on earth, in Jerusalem, in the Upper Room, at the sea of Galilee. And they had to arrive at the conclusion that "Christ being raised from the dead will never die again; death no longer has dominion over him" (Rom 6:9), that he has become the Master of death.
Thomas was not with them, when Christ came to the Upper Room for the first time. That is the reason for his reservation. His "faithlessness". He asked for a proof. The same proof that the others had already had. Their words and news were not enough for him. He wanted to convince himself personally. He wanted to see with his own eyes. He wanted to touch. And he obtained what he asked for. His "faithlessness" became in a certain sense an additional proof.
Attention has been called to this fact more than once. The very fact that he refused to believe the news of the resurrection, contributed, indirectly, to giving the news even greater certainty. "Faithless" Thomas became, in a certain way, an extraordinary spokesman of the certainty of the Resurrection. As St Gregory the Great affirms, "the faithlessness of Thomas was far more useful to us, as regards faith, than the faith of the other disciples. While, in fact, Thomas is brought back to faith through touch, our mind is consolidated in faith with the overcoming of all doubt, Thus the disciple, who doubted and touched, became a witness to the reality of the Resurrection" (XL Homiliarum in Evangelia lib. III, Homil. 26, 7: P.L. 76, 1201).
2. We live in an age in which the human intellect and its achievements are greatly appreciated; and therefore also scientific-consultative methods; its critical attitude. And it is also an age in which the principle of freedom defines the fundamental right of the human person to behave according to his well-founded convictions. Hence freedom of conscience and religious freedom.
The figure of Thomas has become, in a way, particularly close to contemporary man.
The Declaration of the Second Vatican Council on religious liberty stresses with all firmness that neither faith nor non-faith can be forced on man; that this must be a responsible and voluntary act.
"One of the key truths in Catholic teaching, a truth that is contained in the word of God and constantly preached by the Fathers, is that man's response to God by faith ought to be free, and that therefore nobody is to be forced to embrace the faith against his will. The act of faith is of its very nature a free act. Man, redeemed by Christ the Saviour and called through Jesus Christ to be an adopted son of God, cannot give his adherence to God when he reveals himself unless, drawn by the Father, he submits to God with a faith that is reasonable and free. It is therefore fully in accordance with the nature of faith that in religious matters every form of coercion by men should be excluded. Consequently, the principle of religious liberty contributes in no small way to the development of a situation in which men can without hindrance be invited to the Christian faith, embrace it of their own free will and give it practical expression in every sphere of their lives" (Declar. Dignitatis Humanae, n. 10).
All that, however, does not cancel Christ's programme in any way. It is not equivalent to indifference. It does not mean indifferentism. All that proves only that religion draws its importance, its own greatness, both from the objective Reality to which it refers, that is, from God revealing truth and love, and also from the subject: from man, who confesses it in a way worthy of himself: in a rational, responsible and free way.
Today is the day on which the Church lays special emphasis on this maturity of faith.
Christ says to Thomas "noli esse incredulus sed fidelis".
"Do not be faithless, but believing". Faith is and never ceases to be Christ's programme with regard to man.
"Blessed are those who have not seen (like Thomas)... and believe (Jn 20:29). Faith is the purpose of the Resurrection. It is its fruit.
After reciting the Marian prayer with the faithful and imparting the Apostolic Blessing, John Paul II added:
In the last few days, on the occasion of the Easter festivities, a great many messages reached me from all over the world: persons of all ages, position and language, even children, wished to express to the Pope their joy, their thanks, their good wishes. I was really moved by so many voices that I was able to listen to in this way through the letters and telegrams that reached me.
The Secretariat of State is doing everything in its power to answer one and all in the shortest possible time. But right now, and publicly, I wish to say to all those who wrote to me a heartfelt and sincere "thank you": thank you for your affection; thank you for your delicate gesture; thank you especially for your prayers, which I return with all my heart, wishing you Christ's serenity and peace!
  © Copyright 1979 Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Palm Sunday, 8 April 1979
  1. "Auctor fidei nostrae..."—"the pioneer and perfecter of our faith" (cf. Heb12:2): with these words, which come from the Letter to the Hebrews, we address Christ, at the beginning of Holy Week. Holy Week—the Week of the Lord's Passion—leads us to the very sources of our faith. Christ himself is this source. It was he who gained our salvation in an absolute way precisely through the Cross. Precisely because of the fact that he accepted the testament of Gethsemane and Calvary. Precisely because of the fact that he was bound, tried, scourged, crowned with thorns. Precisely because of the fact that he was condemned, that he fell beneath the weight of the Cross. And what can we say about the terrible torment of the agony on the Cross? Let us follow the traces of his sufferings, let us dwell with the utmost attention on every word spoken by him: in the Upper Room, in the garden of Gethsemane, before the Sanhedrin, before Pilate, and finally on the cross. There exists in all that an amazing consistency: the unity of testimony, of mission.
"Auctor fidei nostrae".
It is this very abasement, this emptying: "kenosis", that speaks to us. He wins our hearts because of the truth he taught. Perhaps he would not have won them if he had not confirmed it with this witness. We believe that he is the Son of God, precisely because in this way, right to the end, he revealed himself as the Son of man.
2. He spoke to us of God, and perhaps with that one sentence of the prayer at Gethsemane, or with the seven words he spoke on the cross, he told us who God is even more than in the whole of the Gospel.
The revelation of God becomes penetrating precisely because of the fact that "though he (Christ) was in the form of God, (he) did not count equality with God a thing to be grasped, but emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, being born in the likeness of men" (Phil 2:68).
The penetrating revelation of justice and, at the same time, of love, which is mercy! Justice, love, mercy would have remained concepts without an ultimate and definitive content, if there had not been this Passion and this Cross.
The revelation of this extreme "weakness" of God was necessary in order that it would be possible to manifest what his power is. It was necessary that "the death of God" should take place in the history of mankind in order that he might continually remain in our souls as source of the Life "welling up to eternal life" (Jn 4:14).
3. These are the thoughts, with which we address Christ today, calling him "the Pioneer and Perfecter of our faith". With these thoughts we begin Holy Week today, Palm Sunday, and we wish to live it during all these days and especially during the Sacred Triduum. Meditating on all this, our faith is deepened even more.
May it become even more alive and vital through love.
Let us be born again from this death on which we shall meditate this week. Let hope live again in us.
4. There occurs in these days the month's mind of the late Cardinal Jean Villot, my Secretary of State, as he had been of my revered predecessors Paul VI and John Paul I. I recommend him to your prayers as brothers, all united in the sacred bond of charity, and I wish to recall today, and present once more to the admiration of all, his exemplary Christian, priestly and Episcopal virtues, among which there shone forth, throughout his life, faithful love for the Church, the Bride of Christ.
  © Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 1 April 1979
  "Scindite corda vestra..."
"Rend your hearts..."
1. In time period of Lent this sentence of the Prophet Joel returns repeatedly: "rend your hearts and not your garments" (Joel 2:13). Let us remember that gesture: when, on the night between Thursday and Friday, Jesus was before the court of the Sanhedrin, the high priest asked him the question: "I adjure you by the living God, tell us if you are the Christ, the Son of God"; and when Jesus answered in the affirmative, Caiaphas "tore his robes" (cf. Mt 26:59-68).
The act of tearing one's garments expressed indignation, holy wrath, and also sorrow. It also manifested great interior agitation. But it might also be a purely external act, which did not reach the deep truth of the heart.
Therefore the Prophet admonishes: "Rend your hearts!"
2. It is a relevant call in the period of Lent and especially in these last two weeks that precede Easter. The call is addressed to every man, to his interior self, to his conscience. Conscience is the measure of man. It bears witness to his greatness, his depth. In order that this depth may be opened, in order that man may not let this greatness be taken away from him, God speaks with the word of the cross. "Verbum Crucis": this is the last, the definitive word. God wished to use, and always uses, with regard to man, this word which touches conscience, which has the capacity of reading the human heart.
The inner man must ask himself for what reason God decided to speak with this word. What meaning has this decision of God in the history of man? This is the fundamental question of Lent and of the liturgical period of the Lord's Passion.
3. Modern man experiences the threat of spiritual indifference and even of the death of conscience; and this death is something deeper than sin: it is the killing of the sense of sin. Today so many factors contribute to killing conscience in the men of our time, and this corresponds to that reality which Christ called "sin against the Holy Spirit". This sin begins when the word of the cross no longer speaks to man as the last cry of love, which has the power of rending hearts. "Scindite corda vestra".
The Church does not cease to pray for the conversion of sinners, for the conversion of every man, of each of us, precisely because she respects, because she esteems, man's greatness and depth and rereads the mystery of his heart through the mystery of Christ.
Let us accept, therefore, St Paul's exhortion "not to accept the grace of God in vain" (2 Cor 6:1), but to understand and experience the marvelous reality that "if any one is in Christ, he is a new creation" (ibid. 5:17).
4. The episodes of criminal violence that have taken place recently, here in Rome itself, in London, in Holland, in Spain and elsewhere, have brought deep grief to me, as to all those who harbour Christian and human sentiments of respect for life, God's sacred gift. I wish to express my profound deploration for the now too long chain of brutal crimes, which deeply offend man's dignity and honour.
I hope and pray that everyone will understand that it is not by means of hatred and violence that a just and well-organized society can be established.
May the approach of the days of the Passion of the Lord who died for our salvation, reconciling us with God and obtaining his forgiveness for us, stimulate us to renewed commitment to promote brotherhood and love among men.
Let us now invoke from the Lord, through the intercession of Our Lady, that tranquility in order without which there cannot be a peaceful civil society.
  © Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Fourth Sunday of Lent, 25 March 1979
  1. Laetare, Jerusalem—Rejoice, Jerusalem!
The liturgy of Holy Mass for today, the fourth Sunday of Lent, begins with these words. This call to joy coincides with the date of the Annunciation of the Lord which, in itself, is already a source of joy and hope for all those who, together with Mary, accept this announcement. Although the solemnity of the Annunciation was put forward to yesterday, Saturday, because of this coincidence with the Sunday of Lent, it would be difficult not to recall today's date: 25 March. All the more so in that the prayer which we will shortly recite, the Angelus, constantly reminds us precisely of the Annunciation. "The Angel of the Lord declared unto Mary, and she conceived of the Holy Spirit."
This, therefore, is the solemnity of Christ's virginal conception in Mary's womb through the efficacy of the Holy Spirit. Meditating on this central truth of our faith, let us at the same time remember the spirit in which Mary received the announcement: "Behold I am the handmaid of the Lord; let it be to me according to your word" (Lk 1:38). We see clearly from these words that the Holy Spirit has filled her heart with faith, hope, and charity, which were necessary at that decisive moment for the history of man's salvation.
2. And now all of us gathered here and those who through the radio or television are united with us to recite today, as every Sunday, the Angelus prayer, repeat Mary's words and at the same time meditate on the whole Event of salvation. And by means of this Event we accept all the more willingly the Lenten call of the Church today: "Laetare, Jerusalem" (Rejoice, Jerusalem!).
In this way the Church expresses her joy and, at the same time, calls to it as the fruit of that spiritual work which is carried out during Lent.
Lent, more than any other period in the liturgical year, must be a time of commitment and spiritual effort. But precisely this effort, this toil, gives an occasion for joy. During Lent, the Church lives in the prospect of the joy of the Resurrection. The Sunday call to joy today also reminds us of this prospect; but the joy that comes from toil is even greater. We feel this joy whenever we overcome our spiritual laziness, faint-heartedness, and indifference. We always feel joy when we see that we are capable of demanding something from ourselves; that we are capable of giving something of ourselves to God and to our neighbour. Real spiritual joy is the joy that springs from toil, from effort.
3. Let the period of Lent stimulate us, therefore, to carry out our Christian duties. Let us find again the joy that participation in the Eucharist gives us. Let Sunday Mass become for us the climax of every week. Let us find again the joy that comes from repentance, from conversion, from this splendid sacrament of reconciliation with God, which Christ set up to re-establish peace in man's conscience. Let us undertake the spiritual effort that Lent demands of us in order to be capable of accepting with all the depth of the spirit this call of the Church today: "Laetare, Jerusalem."
4. I wish, finally, to connect with this date of the Annunciation the announcement of my journey to Poland. I thank the Episcopal Conference as well as the Civil Authorities of Poland for the invitation. Inscrutable, indeed, are the decrees of Providence which thus permits the celebration of the nine hundredth anniversary of the martyrdom of Saint Stanislaus by the Pope who, until a short time ago, was his successor in the episcopal see of Krakow. I entrust this papal service in my country to her who said on the day of. the Annunciation, "Behold I am the handmaid of the Lord". I entrust this service, for which I am preparing with my heart and soul, also to your prayers.
5. As you know, tomorrow the peace agreement between Egypt and Israel is to be signed. Let us pray earnestly that this event, which sanctions peace between two countries after so many years of wars and tensions, may mark a decisive impulse given to the dynamic process of peace—for which we all hope for the whole Middle East region—in respect for the rights and for the good of all those peoples, and in order that brotherhood and concord may reign once more in the blessed Land where Jesus was born and lived.
  © Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Third Sunday of Lent
, 18 March 1979
  1. "Ipse liberabit te..."
"He will deliver you..."
These words come from Psalm 90 which begins "Qui habitat in audiutorio Altissimi." "You who dwell in the shelter of the Most High", and which praises merciful Divine Providence. At the moment of the temptation of Christ, the tempter referred to the words of this Psalm. Trying to convince the Messiah to throw himself down from the pinnacle of the temple of Jerusalem, he reminded him that "He will give his angels charge of you, on their hands they will bear you up, lest you strike your foot against a stone" (Mt 4:6).
And then as we know, Christ reproved the tempter, saying: "You shall not tempt the Lord your God" (Mt 4:7). He reproved him for the abuse of the divine words, for their perverse interpretation and for the falsification of the truth contained in them.
"He will deliver you..."
In the period of Lent the Church returns to these words in the Liturgy of the Hours every day. Every day she reminds us of the specific meaning of the liberation of man, which God carried out and continues to carry out in Christ. Every day in the period of Lent the Church recommends us to meditate on this sentence of Psalm 90, in order that we may participate in the liberation: liberation from sin, liberation from the lust of the flesh and the lust of the eyes and the pride of life (cf. 1 Jn 2:16); liberation from what restricts man most, even if it allows him to keep the appearance of autonomy.
Man saves these appearances at the cost of the possession and the use of things, at the cost of a power that he does not intend as a service but as making use of others, often with arrogance, to the detriment of his neighbour. The real liberation of man, the liberation that Christ brings, is also liberation from the appearances of liberation, from the appearances of freedom, which are not true freedom.
"He will deliver you..."
At the beginning of and during Lent the Church calls us to bow our heads before God. When we raise our heads again, we see Christ, the Redeemer of man, who teaches us by his whole life and then definitively with his passion and death what it means "to be free", what it means to make good use of the freedom that belongs to man, what it means to utilize the gift of freedom fully.
This is the teaching of the Gospel. It is the particular teaching of Lent. In this period, we must realize before Christ what use we make of our freedom. Preparing for Easter confession, we must make a thorough examination of conscience.
2. Today I wish, furthermore, to recall the great Pope Pius XII, who, forty years ago, just at the beginning of the month of March 1939, was called to Peter's See, it was almost the eve of the second world war...
I will never forget the deep impression made on me when I had the opportunity to see him at close quarters for the first time. It happened during the audience granted to young priests and seminarians of the Belgian College. When Pius XII, approaching each of those present, arrived at me, the Rector of the College (today Cardinal de Furstenberg) said that I came from Poland. The Pope stopped for a moment, repeated with evident emotion "from Poland", and said in Polish "May Jesus Christ be praised". That took place in the early months of the year 1947, just less than two years after the end of the second world war, which was a terrible ordeal for Europe and especially for Poland.
On this fortieth anniversary of the beginning of that significant pontificate, we cannot forget how much Plus XII contributed to the theological preparation of the Second Vatican Council, especially as regards the doctrine on the Church, the first liturgical reforms, the new impetus given to biblical studies, the great attention paid to problems of the modern world.
It is our natural duty, therefore, to remember that great soul in today's prayer to Mary, to whom he was so devoted, as we all well know.
After the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father addressed special greetings to two particular groups present in the Square.
I wish to address also a special greeting to the many pilgrims gathered here today on the occasion of the "Benedictine Torch" march.
In a few minutes I will light this torch, which a group of young people will carry through Montecassino, Subiaco and other places of Latium and Umbria to Norcia, where it will remain lit for the whole period of the celebrations in honour of St Benedict—the fifteenth centenary of whose birth recurs this year—and of St Scholastica.
I then greet the pupils of the Germanic end Hungarian College, who end here in St Peter's their pilgrimage of the seven Churches of Rome. It is a pious practice so dear to St Philip Neri, the great saint of Rome, and so deeply esteemed during the centuries.
My congratulations, my good wishes and my blessing to all.
  © Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAULL II
ANGELUS
Second Sunday of Lent, 11 March 1979
  1. When we bow our heads before God—as I already mentioned last week, at the beginning of Lent: Inclinate capita vestra Deo—God then commands us to raise them in order to see Christ. God wants us, in fact, to bow our heads before him, but he does not want us to walk with our eyes fixed on the ground. He says to us: "Come and see" (Jn 1:39). Also the first disciples encouraged one another with the words: "Come and see" (Jn 1:46). "We have found the Messiah" (Jn 1:41). Christ is the One who looks into our eyes and he wants us too to look into his eyes: "He who has seen me has seen the Father" (Jn 14:9). We are called to see God, we are continually called to look at Christ.
During this last week, when we took part in the Lenten Exercises, the meditations of Father Faustino Ossanna O.F.M. Conv. were such a call for us. He tried to make the eyes of our souls converge on Christ, who lives in us by means of the Gospel, by means of the grace of redemption; on Christ who abandons himself in the hands of us priests in the Eucharist; on Christ who lives in the Church...
During Lent, we are all called to look at Christ more often, to look at him with greater insight, with more intense love, with firmer hope, to feel his eyes resting on our conscience, on our life. They are the eyes of a Friend, the eyes of a Teacher, the eyes of a Brother.
2. In my first Encyclical, which bears the date of 4 March of the current year, the first Sunday of Lent, and which will be published on Thursday next, I desire that the eyes of the Church and of the world should turn towards Christ the Lord, who is "Man's Redeemer". I tried to express in it what has animated and continually animates my thoughts and my heart since the beginning of the pontificate which, through the inscrutable plan of Providence, I had to assume on 16 October of last year. The Encyclical contains those thoughts which then, at the beginning of this new life, were pressing with particular forcefulness in my mind and which, certainly, had already been maturing in me previously, during the years of my service as a priest, and then as a bishop. I am of the opinion that, if Christ called me in this way, with such thoughts..., with such sentiments, it was because he wanted these calls of the intellect and of the heart, these expressions of faith, hope, and charity, to ring out in my new and universal ministry, right from its beginning. Therefore, as I see and feel the relationship between the Mystery of the Redemption in Christ Jesus and the dignity of man, so I would like so much to unite the mission of the Church with service of man in this his impenetrable mystery. I see in that the central task of my new ecclesial service.
If I confide it to you today, it is because, with you, I would like to ask the Mother of the Church and Seat of Wisdom to accept this first work of mine for the good of the Church and of the man of our times, in order that we can look at Christ together, at this particular moment of history, raising to him the gaze of our faith and of our hope.
3. I would like now to invite all those present to join with me in a special prayer for the elect soul of Cardinal Giovanni Villot, my Secretary of State, called by the Lord to the eternal reward the day before yesterday. The short but intense months of collaboration in this first period of my Pontificate have permitted me to admire his deep faith, exceptional balance, sincere love of the Church, and indefatigable dedication to duty. His sudden decease has caused me deep sorrow. May God receive into his peace this his faithful servant.
4. Nor, lastly, could I omit to tell you, even if briefly, with what attention I am following the new effort in progress for the purpose of bringing to a peaceful settlement the long-standing crisis of the Middle East.
I know the different and even conflicting positions manifested in this connection. But the Pope's love of peace cannot but make him hope and trust deeply that it may be ensured everywhere, in just consideration of the rights and legitimate aspirations of all the peoples concerned. Let us repeat, therefore, tirelessly and without losing heart, our common prayer to the Queen of Peace.
  © Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
First Sunday of Lent, 4 March 1979
  1. Inclinate capita vestra Deo!
This exhortation reached us, as you know, in the period of Lent: "Bow your head before God!" And we do so. The first liturgical gesture with which we started it was precisely the act of bowing our heads on Wednesday last, Ash Wednesday. We bowed our heads to receive the ashes: "You are dust, and to dust you shall return" (Gen 3:19). This is the expression of our mortality; and at the same time a sign of our readiness for repentance and conversion: "Repent and believe in the Gospel" (Mk 1:15).
Bowing the head may be interpreted as a gesture of humiliation or resignation. Bowing the head before God is a sign of humility. Humility, however, is not identified with humiliation or resignation. It is not accompanied by faint-heartedness. On the contrary. Humility is creative submission to the power of truth and love. Humility is rejection of appearances and superficiality; it is the expression of the depth of the human spirit; it is the condition of its greatness.
St Augustine too reminds us of this. In a sermon he says: Magnus esse vis? A minimo incipe. Cogitas magnam fabricam construere celsitudinis? De fundamento prius cogita humilitatis.
"Do you want to be a great? Begin from the smallest thing. Do you intend to construct a large building, which rises up very high? Take into consideration in the first place the foundation of humility" (St Augustine, Serm. 69, 2; PL 38, 441).
This way of thinking is perhaps far removed from many manifestations of the modern mentality. We are often fascinated by apparent values, by exterior grandeur, by what is sensational, what agitates the surface of our psyche. Man becomes, in a certain sense, one-dimensional, detached from his own depth. He builds on foundations that are not deep. And he often suffers at the destruction of what he has built in himself so superficially. Lent calls for a deepening of our internal construction. And it is just this that gives rise to the call to humility, a virtue so significant in the whole Gospel message, the virtue so characteristic of Christ.
Inclinate capita vestra Deo!
Let us bow our heads: in order that the creative power of truth and love may embrace us. And the power of liberation. The power, by means of which man gets up again, thanks to which he grows.
2. Today, 4 March, my thought goes also to the Saint venerated in common by the Poles and Lithuanians: St Casimir, the son of the royal Jagiello family. Recommending to him both of his earthly countries, I feel I am also satisfying a need of the heart.
3. I also wish to express my deep sympathy and fatherly solidarity in the drama of the Neapolitan people afflicted by the illness and death of so many children: I pray earnestly to the Lord that he may soon end this painful ordeal and restore to them serenity and joy in life.
4. And together with you I wish to renew to the Almighty the heartfelt supplication that he may inspire and help the commitment of all those in authority, in order to extinguish every hotbed of war and ensure to all peoples the priceless gift of peace.
  © Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
25 February 1979
  1. In the last few weeks, after my return from Mexico, our Sunday "Angelus" meetings have been inspired more than once by subjects supplied by the recent journey, and, in particular, by the Conference of the Latin-American Episcopate at Puebla.
2. Today, on the other hand, I wish to speak about Rome. I remember vividly my first meeting with the Eternal City. It happened in the late autumn of 1946, when I came here for further study after priestly ordination. Arriving, I bore within me a certain image of Rome drawn from history, literature, and the whole of Christian tradition. For several days I walked about the City (which was not yet so extensive as it is today, and had, perhaps, about a million inhabitants), and I was unable to find again fully the image of that Rome, which I had borne so long in my mind.
Little by little, I found it again. That happened particularly when I visited the most ancient basilicas, but even more when I visited the Catacombs. The Rome of the beginnings of Christianity! The Rome of the Apostles! The Rome of the Martyrs! This Rome, which is at the origins of the Church, and, at the same time, at the origins of that great culture which we have inherited. Today I wish to greet this Rome with the deepest veneration and with the greatest love.
3. The period of Lent, which we are approaching, introduces us every year into the secrets of this Rome and orders us to follow in its footsteps. This year I will do so for the first time as Bishop of Rome. Could anyone have thought of that, when I came here for the first time?
The designs of Divine Providence are really inscrutable!
4. I wish further to remind all those gathered here that the first centenary of the birth of the Catholic Church in Uganda, in the African continent, was celebrated in the second ten days of this month. In fact, as is known, many events took place in that country to commemorate the beginning of evangelization in that nation. The central one was the celebration of the National Eucharistic Congress at Kampala, in which Cardinal James Knox took part, in the capacity of the Pope's Special Envoy.
This centenary Church, which sprung from the blood of the martyrs canonized by the Pope Paul VI in 1964, is a young Church. However, the spiritual history of Rome, the heritage of the Apostles, the tradition of the first Christian basilicas and of the catacombs are felt with deep repercussions also in that young Church. I hope and trust that the faith, hope and love, which Jesus Christ has grafted indestructibly in the heart of man, may persevere in it.
5. Finally, in these days my mind is turned, with deep sorrow, to the conflict, which seems to be intensifying, between China and Vietnam.
Anyone who shares Christ's love for man cannot but be saddened and tremble at the lives that are sacrificed or in danger, and at the sufferings and hardships of combatants and populations. I am thinking in particular of children, the old, and the sick.
No geographical distance, nor any ideological difference, can weaken the sentiment of brotherhood that unites us with every human being living in this world even if he is not baptized, and even thinking that among the soldiers and civilians involved in the war there will be our brothers in faith.
Let our affection go to those peoples on both sides, all sincerely dear to me and let a fervent prayer, yours and mine rise for them.
Let us also pray that the growing and widespread fear that the lack of prompt, just, and honourable solutions may lead to a worsening of suffering and, God forbid, to wider and more terrible repercussions, will not come true. It is a hypothesis that I would not like even to consider. May the blessed Virgin, the Mother of Christ and our Mother, protect those peoples. May she obtain for them resolves of understanding and readiness for agreement, and keep far from everyone any spectre of destruction and death.
  © Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
18 February 1979
  Beloved Friends,
Today I wish to direct my thoughts once more to my recent pastoral journey in Latin America, and I do so not only recalling it in my mind, but also with affection in my heart. In particular, I wish to embrace ideally all those whom I was unable to visit personally, even though they were in the immediate vicinity of the places where I stopped.
In the first place, I intend to recall and greet the dear faithful of the Island of Puerto Rico, so near Santo Domingo, the first stage of my journey to the land of America. They came there at once with a numerous delegation, including Cardinal Luis Aponte Martinez, representatives of the episcopate, of the clergy, of the laity and of the local authorities. Let all Puerto Ricans rest assured of the benevolence and great esteem I nourish for their country.
I also wish to recall the bishops and faithful of the neighbouring Republic of Haiti. Since my presence on their soil was impossible, I hastened to manifest to them, by means of a long, cordial letter, my pastoral solicitude for them and my deepest sentiments of consideration and good wishes, which I am now glad to renew.
I recall also the delegation from Cuba, which I received with great affection, and which confirmed to me the sentiments of absolute faithfulness of those Catholics. In Mexico City, furthermore, I had the opportunity to meet high personalities of the various countries of Central America. I am sorry that I was not able to accept all the invitations, which civil and religious authorities kindly addressed to me, and which in any case I sincerely appreciated.
To all the bishops of Central America and the Antilles, to whom I addressed a message before leaving Mexico; to all whose, whom I had the happy opportunity to address, both in the various letters and in the many meetings, I am happy to renew today my most sincere wishes for their human and Christian prosperity and to assure them that I will not forget anyone.
The purpose of the journey was
— in addition to participating in the opening of the Puebla Conference — that of strengthening the spiritual ties which unite in Christ's one Church, men of different nations, countries, islands, races and continents: bonds which made them all not a mere aggregation, but a community which, extraordinarily composite though it is, constitutes a marvellous unity in Christ Jesus (cf. Gal 3:28).
I think that these ties have really been deepened and consolidated. I humbly thank the Lord for this, well aware that their strengthening is the peculiar mission and responsibility of the Bishop of Rome as the successor of Peter, whose task, according to the ancient definition of St. Ignatius of Antioch, is to "preside over charity" (Ad Rom., prol.), that is, over the communion of charity.
These are the sentiments and the wishes that I intend to entrust to the common prayer of you all, beloved brothers and sisters gathered here in St. Peter's Square, while together we filially address the Mother of Christ and our Mother.
The attention of the whole world has been, and continues to be, drawn by the events that are taking place in Iran: events of historic significance for the present and future of that country, with so many indications of a human character, which concern that great and dear people and the prosperity and even the lives of large numbers of its sons.
My wish rises to the Almighty that, after the developments which we all know, Iran may be able as soon as possible to find the way to domestic peace and serene progress, in order, in justice, and in the industrious concord of its citizens.
Other parts of the world are the theatre of events, great and small, which, beyond the consequences of a political nature which they may have, entail problems and sufferings, sometimes dramatic ones, for a large number of persons
— often humble people, in particular women, youths and children — who, more than protagonists of these events, are engulfed by them.
How could my thought fail to go with a special sentiment of affection and participation, in this regard, to the populations, already so sorely tried, of Asia and of the Indo-Chinese Peninsula. A sudden new event has dominated everyone's mind since this morning: the blazing up of a conflict also at the frontiers between Vietnam and China. Peoples are suffering, men are dying.
Let our heartfelt prayer go also to these brothers of ours!
  © Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
11 February 1979
  Beloved Brothers and Sisters,
Allow me to return again to that great event that the journey in Mexico was for me, all the more so in that the Conference of the Latin-American Episcopate is still continuing its work, which is drawing to a close, in Puebla. That journey covers a great many subjects, which it will be necessary to develop and even, in certain cases, begin all over again. All this journey has remained deeply impressed on my mind and my heart, beginning with the arrival at Santo Domingo, where Christopher Columbus landed for the first time, where Holy Mass was celebrated for the first time in the "new world", and where the first episcopal see was erected.
Today, however. I wish, above all, to speak to you of my meeting with the sick. This meeting will take place in St Peter's Basilica this afternoon, while I still have in my mind and my heart all the meetings with the sick in Mexico, and in particular that one which took place in the church of the Dominican Fathers at Oaxaca.
I am grateful to those who organized that meeting: to the priests, physicians, and hospital attendants. Due to them, I was able on Mexican land to approach so many sick persons, my brothers and sisters. I was able to lay my hand on their heads, I was able to speak a word of compassion, of comfort, and I was able to ask for their prayer.
I count a great deal on the prayer of the sick, on the intercession with God of those who are suffering. They are so near Christ! And I approach them, aware that Christ is present in them.
The suffering of one's neighbour, the suffering of another man, the same as oneself in everything, always causes a certain uneasiness, almost a sense of embarrassment, in those who are not suffering. A question arises instinctively: why he, and not I? One cannot avoid this question which is the elementary expression of human solidarity. I think it was this fundamental solidarity that created medicine and the whole health service in its historical evolution up to our own days.
We must stop, then, in front of suffering, in front of suffering man, to rediscover this essential link between one's human "self" and his. We must stop before suffering man, to testify to him and, as far as possible, together with him, all the dignity of suffering, I would say all the majesty of suffering. We must bow our heads before brothers or sisters who are weak and helpless, deprived just of what has been granted to us to enjoy every day.
These are just some aspects of that great ordeal which costs man so much, but which purifies him at the same time, as it purifies the one who seeks solidarity with the other, with the suffering human “self”.
Christ said: “I was sick and you visited me” (Mt 25:36).
Let us pray today for all the sick persons whom I met on the ways of my journey in Mexico, and also for those, even more numerous, whom I was not able to meet, let us pray also for those who will take part today in the Mass in St Peter’s Basilica and for all those who are suffering, wherever they may be.
We are your debtors, beloved suffering Brothers and Sisters. The Pope is your debtor!
My thought also goes to the Sanctuary of Lourdes, for today is the anniversary of the first vision that St Bernadette had. Moreover, as you already know, the next International Eucharistic Congress will take place just there, in the year 1981, on the important subject: “Jesus Christ, bread broken for the salvation of the world”.
So I warmly recommend this initiative, too, to your prayers, while we all invoke the Blessed Virgin together.
After the recitation of the "Angelus", the Holy Father spoke to the faithful of the fiftieth anniversary of the signing of the Lateran Pacts. In this connection the Pope said:
Today is also the fiftieth anniversary of the signing of the Lateran Pacts between the Holy See and Italy. One of the Pacts, as you know, is the "Treaty", which set up the Vatican City State, thus restoring to the Pope and his instruments of apostolic government full and visible independence in front of Italy and all the peoples of the world, in order that the action of Teacher and Pastor, which is incumbent on the successor of Peter with regard to all believers, may be increasingly free, impartial, and supranational. The other Pact is the "Concordat", which settles questions that concern the life of the Church within the Italian State, and in particular full religious freedom, the life of Catholic institutions, recognition of religious marriage, and religious instruction in schools.
At this moment, my reverent and grateful thought goes to the memory of the great Pontiff Pius XI who wanted the happy solution of the Roman Question, and who, with the Concordat, was concerned with the spiritual good of the Italian nation and of youth in particular.
Let us pray for this great Pope and for the other eminent Pontiffs who succeeded him. Let us pray that the desired revision of the Concordat will soon be successfully concluded, as I hope, and as Paul VI and John Paul I ardently desired; and let us pray that the treasures of her bimillenary faith and freedom and religious peace may always be preserved for Italy.
  © Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
4 February 1979 
  Today I wish to express my deep gratitude to God who has permitted me, right at the beginning of my pontificate, to carry out a special service for the Church and for the People of God in Mexico. To grasp adequately the significance of this service, one must have before one's eyes the whole past, the most distant as also the recent past, of the Church in this country, as well as the contemporary situation of Mexico and of the whole of Latin America. This is being studied at Puebla by the Conference of Representatives of the Episcopate of that whole continent.
The Pope's service was directly connected with this conference, and that offered the opportunity to highlight, in actual fact, episcopal collegiality in pastoral solicitude for the Church.
At the same time, my service found in the whole Catholic community of Mexico a well-prepared soil. This is testified not only by the many meetings with the bishops, priests, men and women religious, laity, youth, the sick, workers, and the "campesinos", but also by the whole course of the visit. The meeting with Catholic Mexico actually lasted uninterruptedly for the whole period of my stay in that country. Every time I passed along the streets, every time I came out of the door of the residence, a meeting at once took place in which, briefly, millions of persons participated. The same thing happened during the one-day stop at Santo Domingo on the way out, and also in the Bahamas, for the short space of two hours, on the way back, even though this stop took place in the middle of the night.
And just because of this meeting with the People of God, which is the living Church—because of this meeting as a whole and particularly because of what took place in Mexico—I wish today, here in St Peter's Square, to thank God, Jesus Christ and his Mother. The manifestation and, in a certain sense, the testimony of the Church as a great community that believes and prays, that is "one heart" and one mind, is a particular fruit of these days, so busy, but how blessed.
Can all this solve the multiple problems of the daily life of Mexico and Latin America, those problems to which the various passages of my addresses referred, and on which the Puebla Conference will work until 12 February? Certainly not.
However, this great and multiple meeting with the People of God, its course and the climate created, enable us, push us, to look at these problems in a precise context: the context, above all, of men, of the communities that live faith and hope, that appreciate freedom; that are thirsty for justice and peace.
It is necessary, therefore, to look at all these problems, in the first place, with real love for man as he is.
The whole "Mexican" meeting showed with what intensity the man of that country—and certainly of the whole Latin-American continent—believes in this love brought by Christ, and with what deep aspiration he waits, above all, for this love. In it he sees the main and deepest solution of his problems. He rejoices in the mere hope of this solution.
Today, at this appointment for the "Angelus", I recommend to your prayers all the people whom I met in Mexico: in the capital, in Guadalupe, Puebla, Oaxaca, Guadalajara, Monterrey, in the streets and along the roads, and during all the meetings and addresses: all the people of Mexico and of Latin America.
Let us pray that the Church may be able to carry out her mission and her service with regard to all those people, in order that they may show Christ's love which overcomes everything (cf.1 Cor 13:4) as the programme of their daily, family, and social life; and let us pray that this love may prove to be stronger than everything that stands in its way and tries to destroy it.
May such be the fruit of my service with regard to the Church in Mexico and in Latin America
  © Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 21 January 1979
1. We are in the Octave of prayers for the unity of Christians, which started, as every year, on 18 January, on the subject: "Serve one another to the glory of God" (l Pt 4:7-11).
The effort that is directed towards the union of all believers in Christ, has a significance that is most of all religious.
We all desire to meet this request of our Master and Redeemer who, on the eve of his passion and death, addressed the Father as follows:
"Holy Father, keep them in thy name which thou hast given me, that they may be one, even as we are one" (Jn 17: 11).
Let us recall what the Constitution Gaudium et Spes says in this connection: "The Lord Jesus, when praying to the Father 'that they may all be one ... even as we are one' (Jn 17:21-22), has opened up new horizons, closed to human reason, by implying that there is a certain parallel between the union existing among the divine persons and the union of the sons of God in truth and love." (Gaudium et Spes, 24).
Whenever we pray for the union of Christians, we enter into this perspective. We believe that this perspective of the perfect union of the children of God united in truth and charity, must be constantly strengthened by constant and ever confident prayer.
The programme of work in this field was outlined by the Second Vatican Council; it is being implemented by the Catholic Church, gradually and perseveringly, through the Secretariat for the Union of Christians.
The most significant thing in this programme is respect for man, for his conscience, for his religious convictions, as well as for the spiritual heritage of the individual Churches and Christian communities.
Only on the basis of this respect for man can the ways of rapprochement, cooperation, and union of Christians, be opened.
2. But the ecumenical effort has an even wider significance. It indicates indirectly the ways that lead to rapprochement, coexistence, cooperation and union among men. And here, too, it is necessary to start from respect for man.
The programme for union becomes in our times an eloquent "sign of contradiction" with regard to the various programmes of struggle, which do not spare man in order to achieve their purposes or impose them on others.
This way of acting, this "praxis", has nothing to do with the honest struggle of different convictions, different conceptions, in the field of the fundamental problems of social life. It is, rather, a practical distortion of whatever ideology aspires to the good of man.
When innocent men die, when society lives in a state of threat, then it reveals its worst face: not the struggle for the good of man, but the struggle against man.
Is not this struggle
— from various standpoints — "a painful sign of our times"?
3. Therefore that "sign of contradiction", born of the prayer of Christ himself and dictated by love for man, is indispensable.
"Do not be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good" (Rom 12:21), the Apostle says.
In an age in which the different programmes of the struggle for man often assume threatening forms of struggle against man, it is necessary to strive for the rapprochement of men, for their union on the basis of respect of what is essentially and deeply human.
May the ecumenical movement become an ever clearer example of this effort!
May this example overcome the threatening forces of hatred, of estrangement and of the struggle against man!
"To overcome evil with good", that is the central idea of our joint prayer today.
I know that there are present this morning about three thousand boys and girls and young people who, after attending Mass in S. Andrea della Valle, have gathered here in St Peter's Square, in an orderly "Caravan of Peace", to greet the Pope. Dearly beloved, with great affection I reciprocate your testimony of faith and goodness, and I exhort you warmly, in this month of initiatives for peace, to combat more and more generously the passions of pride and hatred which are at the root of the destruction that threatens peace, and to become promoters of concord and brotherhood.
Remember the words spoken by Jesus, during the Last Supper: "...By this all men will know that you are my disciples if you have love for one another" (Jn 13:35).
  © Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 14 January 1979
  Today the Day for the Seminary is celebrated in the diocese of Rome, for the purpose of calling attention to the diocesan seminary, that is, to its aim of welcoming generous souls of youths directed towards the ministerial priesthood, and to its need for support, also on the material plane, from the diocesan community.
If we ask ourselves what is the seminary, we must answer that it is a place and a period of life in which those who have received the gift of a particular call form their vocations and prepare for Christ's priesthood.
The Second Vatican Council is clear and also demanding on this subject. One of its texts runs as follows: "The duty of fostering vocations falls on the whole Christian community, and they should discharge it principally by living full Christian lives. The greatest contribution is made by families which are animated by a spirit of faith, charity and piety and which provide, as it were, a first seminary, and by parishes in whose abundant life the young people themselves take an active part" (Optatam Totius, 2).
In other words, we could say that the seminary represents an extraordinary verification of the spiritual motherhood of the Church, that is, of the People of God present in the local diocesan Church, just as individual vocations are the verification of the Christian vitality of each parish and even of individual families.
It is a question of bringing the vocation to maturity. This is possible in an atmosphere of meditation, which, however, does not exclude adequate and full preparation for "public life", that is, for that social element of the priestly ministry, characteristic of a "shepherd" who lives for his flock. It is an experience which contains a certain similarity with the hidden life at Nazareth, where our Lord "increased in wisdom and in stature, and in favour with God and man" (Lk 2:52), preparing for his mission in the midst of the people of Israel.
In its present form, the seminary is a typical institution of the Church. It goes back to the Council of Trent, when it found in the great St Charles Borromeo an effective promoter and an enlightened organizer. But it is an institution which has a specific ecclesial structure, since its programmes of spiritual, intellectual, and recreational life are ordained only to the building up of the Mystical Body of Christ in the world.
It is always said that the seminary is "the apple of the bishop's eye", and it is true. It is, in fact, the dearest thing every bishop can have to ensure a constant service, corresponding to his own diocesan community. But it is and must always be a prolongation of the common concern of all, clergy laity.
My invitation and my hope is at least today's Day for the Seminary of Rome will be a propitious opportunity for all Romans to manifest this concern. Let us pray, therefore, today and always that the Lord may send workers into his harvest.
  © Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 7 January 1979
  1. On the feast of the Epiphany, the Church thanks God for the gift of faith in which so many men, peoples and nations have participated and participate. And just those three
— according to tradition, men from the East, Wise Kings — who arrived in Bethlehem are among the first witnesses and bearers of this gift. In them, faith, understood as an inner opening-up of man, as the answer to the light, to the Epiphany of God, finds its limpid expression. In this opening-up to God man eternally aspires to self-fulfilment. Faith is the beginning of this fulfilment and its condition.
Thanking God for the gift of faith, we thank him at the same time for the light: for the gift of the Epiphany and for the gift of the opening-up of our spirit to divine light. Such is also the significance of the feast through which the Church expresses, so to speak, right up to the end, the joy of Christmas, of the Birth of God.
2. For over a hundred years, a serious accusation has been levelled at the believer. Religion, according to the words of the accusation, "alienates man", that is, it allegedly deprives man of what is substantially human.
A radical division has been made between what is "substantially human" and what is "transcendental". In modern times the old formula altiora te non quaeras ("do not seek things that are above you") has been repeated.
Contrary to this accusation and this ban, the Wise Kings from the East hasten to go to Bethlehem: And together with them, so many, so very many men. They all bear witness that what is "substantially human" is expressed not in the formula quoted, but in another one, equally old: altiora te quaeras ("seek things that are above you").
Is it possible to lay down what is "substantially human" without having recourse to man's full experience? Who has the right to affirm that this full experience of man's is expressed just in the formula altiora te non quaeras? Who has the right to affirm that man's complete fulfilment is equivalent to his closing-up and not, on the contrary, just to his opening-up that is, to that altiora te quaeras!?
3. In our times people often have recourse to the principle of religious freedom. And rightly. This is one of the most fundamental human rights. The Second Vatican Council dedicated one of its documents to religious freedom. More and more often this right has a key place in legislative documents. But a great deal still remains to be done for the correct operation of this principle in social, public, state, and international life. And here there is no other way; there is only this one: it is necessary to free the believer from the accusation of alienation. Precisely this accusation is the cause of the great harm done to men in the name of man's "progress".
It is necessary to let the Wise Kings go to Bethlehem. Together with them walks every man who recognizes as the definition of his humanity the truth of the opening-up of his spirit to God, the truth that is expressed in the sentence altiora te quaeras.
An opposite formula cannot be imposed on men. It is not possible, according to this formula, altiora te non quaeras, to understand and interpret the very principle of religious freedom, in social and public life, because then it would be distorted.
Today the Church thanks God for faith, for the gift of the Epiphany, and, at the same time, for the gift of opening-up.
The whole Church asks and operates in this direction in order that the double gift, which is at the basis of so many questions and human affairs, will find the right of citizenship in the lives of individuals, nations, states, and continents; in the life of the whole of mankind.
  © Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
SOLEMNITY OF MARY THE MOTHER OF GOD
AND THE 12TH WORLD DAY OF PEACE
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Monday, 1 January 1979
  At the beginning of a new year, with what other words could I address you, dear friends, than words of good wishes? "Happy New Year", therefore, to you, my brothers and sisters! To you who have come to this square to bear witness with your presence to the affection you cherish for the Pope; and "Happy New Year" to all those who are present here in spirit. The Pope would like to be able to cross the threshold of all houses, especially those in which poverty, illness, and loneliness make their weight felt—including hospitals and prisons—and bring everywhere a word of comfort, encouragement and hope.
"Happy New Year" to everyone, in the light that shines forth from the sweet face of the Virgin Mary, whom the Liturgy invites us to venerate, today, in the mystery of her divine motherhood! "Concepit de Spiritu Sancto", she conceived through the Holy Spirit, we will shortly say in the "Angelus" and our mind will be invited to reflect on the decisive moment of the incarnation of the Word of God. That solemn moment, even if so humble and hidden, puts us in an attitude of thoughtful admiration and instinctive respect before the initial moment of the earthly existence of every human being.
On the first day of this new year, I wish to address a special greeting to all those who will be born in the course of the next months, to those who will receive the gift of life in the year of the Lord 1979. May they find the affectionate warmth of hearts that wait for them and are able to rejoice in the marvellous miracle of a new life.
Today the World Day of Peace is celebrated. This subject of peace, if it is near to the heart of every responsible and generous human being, arouses a particular very deep concern in the Pope, who knows that he has been placed by Christ as pastor of the whole of mankind. In this connection, I wish to recommend to your prayer today two delicate situations, for which the Holy See has considered it its duty to start specific initiatives. I am referring to the tormented vicissitudes of Lebanon, in which so much blood, too much blood, has already been shed, and to the more recent controversy that has broken out between Argentina and Chile over the Beagle Canal Islands. The missions sent by the Holy See have been given, in both cases, a cordial reception both by the Authorities and by the population. It is now necessary that the prayer of everyone should obtain from God abundant gifts of far-sightedness, balance, and courage, in order that the ways of peace may be followed and the goal of a just and honourable solution be reached as soon as possible.
In this day, too—a day that should be one of joy for everyone—my thought goes to the victims of kidnapping, who are still kept with unjust violence far from their families. I am saddened in particular by the situation of those who, still in childhood, are more exposed to the psychological traumas of such a dramatic experience. Let all of us, gathered here, raise our prayer to God for them, trusting that the characteristic atmosphere with which these days are suffused, may reawaken in the hearts of their oppressors sentiments of a rightful change of heart and of renewed humanity.
Let us pray, brothers and sisters: The angel of the Lord ...
  © Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
APOSTOLIC PILGRIMAGE TO NIGERIA, BENIN 
GABON AND EQUATORIAL GUINEA
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Kaduna (Nigeria)
Sunday, 14 February 1982
Dear brothers and sisters in Christ,
In the middle of this day which the Lord has made, I invite you to turn to Mary the Mother of God, and to pray the Angelus with me. We are united with the Church in Rome and throughout the world.
For many centuries, the Church has had the beautiful custom of stopping for a moment in the morning, at midday and in the evening to voice a prayer in honour of the Blessed Virgin Mary. We ourselves gladly continue this tradition of filial devotion to the Mother of God. We too wish to imitate Mary’s example of humble obedience to the word of God and we seek to enter more fully into the mystery of the Word made flesh.
In countries throughout the world, church bells ring out their joyful invitation to recite the Angelus.
As we join our voices now in humble prayer and praise, let us entrust to the Mother of the Church the needs and petitions of all her sons and daughters. May our Blessed Mother watch over our families and our loved ones; may she watch over all nations and peoples. In particular may she bring comfort to the sick and to those in sorrow. O Mary, Mother of the Church, pray for us.
After the Angelus

Consecration of Nigeria to the Virgin Mary 
1. “O Mother of all individuals and peoples...”
You who were with your Church at the beginning of her mission, intercede for her that, going forth to the whole world, she may ever teach all nations and proclaim the Gospel to every creature.
2. With these words, through which, together with the bishops of the whole world I greeted you in Rome, O Mother of God, Theotokos, on the solemn day of last Pentecost, I wish to greet you today, together with the bishops of the Church in Nigeria – the country that I am visiting during these days.
3. And I desire to consecrate and entrust to you, Mother of the Church, in a special way, the Church in the land of Nigeria, just as on the day of Pentecost I consecrated and entrusted to you the Church among all nations and peoples of the earth: the Church and the world.
4. In today’s consecration I entrust to you all those who live and work in this African continent, all of whom the heavenly Father has loved eternally in Jesus Christ and whom he wills to save through Christ’s blood shed on the Cross.
5. O Mother of the Church! May the priests just ordained, sons of this land, “chosen from among men”, become for the good of everyone true “ministers of Christ and stewards of the mysteries of God”. May they carry forward the apostolic work begun here by the missionaries some generations ago.
6. The Word of God, through the action of the Holy Spirit, became flesh in your virginal womb.
May the word of God now grow and spread for the salvation of all the world. Amen.

© Copyright 1982 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
APOSTOLIC VISIT TO CANADA
 JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Cathedral of Saint Mary (Winnipeg)
Sunday, 16 September 1984
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. At this midday hour, we gather in the Cathedral of Saint Mary to pray the Angelus together. The Lord invites us to pause for a moment, and, in the company of the Blessed Virgin Mary and all the saints, to ponder the mystery of the Redemption and to lift our voices in praise of the Most Holy Trinity. It is a joy to be with you here in Winnipeg, and especially to join in prayer with the local Catholic community. I greet you all in the peace and love of Christ, and I extend cordial greetings to all the beloved people of this city and of the Province of Manitoba.
In the Gospel of this Twenty-fourth Sunday of Ordinary Time, Peter asks Jesus the questions: "Lord, how often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? As many as seven times’? Jesus said to him, ‘I do not say to you seven times, but seventy times seven’" (Matth. 18, 21-22).
"Seventy times seven": with this reply the Lord wants to make it clear to Peter and to us that we should set no limit to our forgiveness of others. Just as the Lord is always be ready to forgive us, so we must always be ready to forgive one another. And how great is the need for forgiveness and reconciliation in our world today - indeed in our communities and families, in our very own hearts! That is why the special sacrament of the Church for forgiveness, the Sacrament of Penance, is such a precious gift from the Lord.
2. In the Sacrament of Penance, God extends his forgiveness to us in a very personal way. Through the ministry of the priest, we come to our loving Saviour with the burden of our sins. We confess that we have sinned against God and our neighbour. We manifest our sorrow and ask for pardon from the Lord. Then, through the priest, we hear Christ say to us: "Your sins are forgiven" (Marc. 2, 5); "Go, and do not sin again" (Io. 8, 11). Can we not also hear him say to us as we are filled with his saving grace: "Extend to others, seventy times seven, this same forgiveness and mercy"?
3. This is the work of the Church in every age - it is the duty of each one of us - "to profess and proclaim God’s mercy in all its truth" (Ioannis Pauli PP. II, Dives in Misericordia, 13), to extend to whomever we meet each day the same unlimited forgiveness that we have received from Christ. We practice mercy, too, when we "bear with one another charitably, in complete selflessness, gentleness and patience" (Eph. 4, 2). And God’s mercy is also shown by generous and untiring service, like that required in offering health care for the sick or in carrying out medical research with persevering dedication.
On this day of the Lord when we celebrate the fullest expression of God’s abundant mercy - the Cross and Resurrection of Christ - let us praise our God who is rich in mercy. And, in imitation of his great love, let us forgive anyone who may have hurt us in any way. With the Blessed Mother of God, we proclaim the mercy of God which extends from generation to generation.
  © Copyright 1984 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
APOSTOLIC VISIT TO CANADA
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Central Commons (Halkifax)
Thursday, 13 September 1984
  Dear Young People,
1. Greet you in the peace of Christ! It is a great joy to be with you this evening at Central Commons in Halifax. As you know I am always happy to meet with young people, whether in Rome or during my travels throughout the world. It is a pleasure to be with you because I see in your faces an openness to learn and an eagerness to serve. I know of the great desire you have for peace and unity throughout the world. I am well aware, too, that the future belongs to you, that the decisions you make will shape the Church and the world of tomorrow.
2. As we gather this evening to pray the "Angelus", there is a common spirit of faith and joy which unites us. It is only right that we should feel this way since we are gathered as friends, as brothers and sisters in Christ. We know, too, that the Church is a communion of persons - men, women and children of different ages and races, different backgrounds and cultures, people who, while so diverse, are all made one by the love of Christ and the gift of the Holy Spirit.
This communion of persons which is the Church is really a mystery, in that it is more wonderful than we could imagine, greater than our minds could ever comprehend. As members of the one Body of Christ, we share in the very life of the Most Holy Trinity, united with one another as children of a loving Father, as brothers and sisters in Jesus Christ, coheirs of the Kingdom of heaven.
3. What we have received as a gift. The great gift of communion with God must be shared with others. Our modern world is torn apart by prejudice and violence, while our families are threatened by divorce, pornography, alcohol and drug abuse and many other evils. To the world in 1984 and beyond, to our families and to our cities, we must bring the gifts of communion and love. We must forge the bonds of justice and peace. You who are young and full of enthusiasm have a special part to play in the mission of the Church.
Try, then, to create a communion of Christian love at home and in your schools, in your parishes and neighbourhoods, among your friends and with people of all ages. Recall the words of Saint Paul: "Lead a life worthy of your vocation. Bear with one another charitably, in complete selflessness, gentleness and patience. Do all you can to preserve the unity of the Spirit by the peace that binds you together".
Dear young people of Halifax: The Lord Jesus is counting on you!
4. Each evening, in countries throughout the world, church bells ring out, inviting people to recite the "Angelus". As we turn in prayer to the Mother of God this evening, we recall how she, already as a young woman, was closely united to the mystery of Christ, fully devoted to his work of salvation. From her example of faith and prayer, we learn how to meet God in the deep recesses of our hearts, we learn how to listen to God’s word that it may bear fruit in our lives.
Let us, then, turn to Mary with great confidence and hope, bringing to her our petition for a communion of love and harmony in our homes and for peace and unity in the world. Mary, Mother of God and Queen of Peace, pray for us.
  © Copyright 1984 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
APOSTOLIC JOURNEY TO KOREA, PAPUA NEW GUINEA,
 SOLOMON ISLANDS AND THAILAND
 JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CAELI
Seoul (Corea) - Sunday, 6 May 1984
  We have just celebrated together the happiest day, the greatest feast, in the whole history of the Church in Korea.
Our hearts brim with joy. How shall we ever give enough thanks and praise to the Lord of Heaven, Father of us all, who has done such "great things" in this his beloved land of Korea? And for having given us in these holy Martyrs such splendid models of faith, courage, and love? The universal Church is with you here at Youido on this glorious day, rejoicing and praising the Lord: Gloria in excelsis Deo!
Today, your holy ancestors are glorified with the glory of the Risen Lord. Because they bore witness to him unto death, united to his Cross, they now share in his risen life forever. They have thus entered into the joy of Mary, who at the foot of the Cross shared in the passion and death of her Son, our Saviour. The Queen of Martyrs rejoices with you!
But, as with most great feasts, we cannot fail to remember those dear to us who could not come to share in the joy: those brethren in the North of this land, and those also in China through which Korea came to know Christ. We pray that they may continue to be strong in bearing witness to the faith. May Mary the Mother of us all comfort and strengthen them as we now invoke her as the Queen of heaven.
  © Copyright 1984 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
APOSTOLIC JOURNEY TO TOGO, IVORY COAST, CAMEROON,
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC, ZAIRE, KENYA AND MOROCCO
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Nairobi (Kenya)
Sunday, 18  August 1985
  At the end of this Mass, I invite you to recite with me the familiar prayer to Mary which we call the Angelus. Our communion in prayer with the Mother of God not only embraces those who are gathered here in Nairobi but reaches out to the whole world. Together with the Mother of our Saviour we lift our minds and hearts to God in praise and thanksgiving, and in loving contemplation of the mystery of divine providence.
When Mary first agreed to be the Mother of God, when she said «Let it be done to me according to your word» (Luc. 1, 38), the Word was made flesh, the divine and eternal word of God became man in her womb. And the history of humanity was absolutely changed. The world could never be the same again. God was now living in human flesh. Jesus had become our brother, a man like us in every way except sin.
The mystery of the Incarnation, the mystery of God becoming man, helps us to understand the mystery of the Eucharist. For what began in the town of Nazareth through the Blessed Virgin’s generosity did not come to an end with the Death and Resurrection of Christ. No, Christ continues to be in the world through the Church, and especially through the Sacred Liturgy. When God’s word is read at Mass, it is Christ himself who speaks to his people. And Saint Paul tells us: «The blessing-cup that we bless is a communion with the blood of Christ, and the bread that we break is a communion with the body of Christ» (1 Cor. 10, 16).
So if we wish to be close to Jesus, we must draw near to the altar of Sacrifice; we must love Christ in the Eucharist fervently and reverently. The Eucharist is the fountain of all virtues. It is spiritual food for daily living. It is the main source of life and love for the Christian family. It gives us a foretaste of the eternal happiness we shall share one day when we finally enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
How wonderful is this mystery of God dwelling in our midst! The mystery of the Incarnation, the mystery of the Eucharist! The mystery of Christ among us makes us want to glorify God’s name. We gladly join the Virgin Mary in her hymn of praise: «My soul proclaims the greatness of the Lord and my spirit exults in God my saviour» (Luc. 1, 46-47). Together with Mary and all the angels and saints, we thank God for the Holy Eucharist.
And now let us pray together with the words of the Angelus.
At the end of this great Eucharistic assembly I wish to thank Cardinal Cordeiro, the Papal Legate, and all the Cardinals and Bishops who have come to this International Eucharistic Congress from different countries of the world, in order to express on African soil the unity of the Church of Christ.
My sincere gratitude goes to the delegations from Angola, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Botswana, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, China, Colombia, Djibuti, Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Germany, Ghana, Great Britain, Guinea, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Ivory Coast, Japan, Korea, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Lithuania, Malawi, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Mozambique, Netherlands, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Rwanda, Samoa, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Spain, Sri-Lanka, the Sudan, Swaziland, Switzerland, Tanzania, Uganda, United States of America, Zaire, Zambia and Zimbabwe. I pray that our Eucharistic Lord will pour out his blessings upon all those whom you have represented at this ecclesial event.
I am deeply grateful to all our brethren of other Christian churches and ecclesial communities, who are with us today and whom we embraced with esteem, gratitude and love; with this same sentiment I also greet and embrace all our non-Christian brethren.
At the same time we all note with deep regret the absence of those who wanted to be with us but who could not come. I send my greetings particularly to the Bishops of Burundi whose pastoral activities I entrust to the maternal protection of Mary, the Mother of the Incarnate Word.
And finally, I wish to express to the Most Blessed Trinity, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, praise and thanksgiving for these holy days of grace given to the Church of God.
Amen.
  © Copyright 1985 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
APOSTOLIC JOURNEY TO THE FAR EAST AND OCEANIA
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Adelaide, Australia
Sunday, 30 November 1986
1. At the end of this Eucharistic celebration, I invite you to join me in praying the Angelus. This prayer takes its name from the Angel’s message to Mary: “Rejoice . . . the Lord is with you”. Soon, in the Christmas liturgy, you will hear those other words of joy which announced the birth of Jesus: “Listen, I bring you news of great joy, a joy to be shared by all the people”.
I have said before on another occasion: “In a true sense, joy is the keynote of the Christian message". As I said then, my wish is that the Christian message may bring joy to all who open their hearts to it: “joy to children, joy to parents, joy to families and to friends, joy to workers and scholars, joy to the sick and to the elderly, joy to all humanity”. I now add: “joy - deep and lasting joy - to the people of Australia”.
2. Faith is our source of joy We believe in a God who created us so that we might enjoy human happiness - in some measure on earth, in its fullness in heaven. We are meant to have our human joys: the joy of living, the joy of love and friendship, the joy of work well done. We who are Christians have a further cause for joy: like Jesus, we know that we are loved by God our Father. This love transforms our lives and fills us with joy. It makes us see that Jesus did not come to lay burdens upon us. He came to teach us what it means to be fully happy and fully human. Therefore, we discover joy when we discover truth - the truth about God our Father, the truth about Jesus our Saviour, the truth about the Holy Spirit who lives in our hearts.
3. We do not pretend that life is all beauty. We are aware of darkness and sin, of poverty and pain. But we know Jesus has conquered sin and passed through his own pain to the glory of the Resurrection. And we live in the light of his Paschal Mystery - the mystery of his Death and Resurrection. “We are an Easter People and Alleluia is our song!”. We are not looking for a shallow joy but rather a joy that comes from faith, that grows through unselfish love, that respects the “fundamental duty of love of neighbour, without which it would be unbecoming to speak of Joy”. We realize that joy is demanding; it demands unselfishness; it demands a readiness to say with Mary: “Be it done unto me according to thy word”.
4. Mary, our Mother: I turn to you and with the Church I invoke you as Mother of Joy (Mater plena sanctae laetitiae). I, John Paul II, entrust to you the Church in Australia, and ask you to pour out upon all her members that holy human joy which was God’s gift to you.
Help all your children to see that the good things in their lives come to them from God the Father through your Son Jesus Christ. Help them to experience in the Holy Spirit the joy which filled your own Immaculate Heart. And in the midst of the sufferings and trials of life may they find the fullness of joy that belongs to the victory of your Crucified Son, and comes forth from his Sacred Heart.
Today is the feast of Saint Andrew, the Patron of the Church of Constantinople. Every year the Church of Rome sends a delegation to share this feast, just as the Church of Constantinople does for the feast of Saints Peter and Paul. Once again I send greetings to our beloved sister Church.
  © Copyright 1986 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
APOSTOLIC JOURNEY TO THE FAR EAST AND OCEANIA
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Wellington, New Zealand
Sunday, 23 November 1986
  1. At the end of this Mass in honour of Christ the King, we turn our thoughts for a moment to his Blessed Mother, and we join together in the prayer of the Angelus.
This beautiful prayer begins with the words: “The Angel of the Lord declared unto Mary”. God the Father takes the initiative and sends his messenger to invite Mary to be the Mother of his beloved Son. Saint Luke tells us: “The Angel Gabriel was sent by God to a town in Galilee called Nazareth, to a virgin betrothed to a man named Joseph . . . and the virgin’s name was Mary”.
2. The greatest moment in Mary’s life began at God’s initiative. Through the Angel Gabriel, God invites; and in willing simplicity Mary responds. God proposes and Mary accepts. “Fiat”, she says: “Let it be to me according to your word”. This is the moment when Mary became the Mother of God. This is the turning point of the whole history of the human race, the moment when God became man. This is the way that the Virgin Mary agreed to the mystery of the Incarnation, the way she agreed to become the Mother of God.
3. In the history of salvation and in the life of each one of us, God is continually taking the initiative, asking us to respond in faith, inviting us to give our consent. It is God who takes the initiative because it is God who directs the course of history. As the Lord says through the Prophet Jeremiah: “I know the plans I have in mind for you... plans for peace, not disaster, reserving a future full of hope for you”.
We pray the Angelus with a desire to become more like Mary, to have a deep trust in God’s plans for us, great confidence in his loving providence. And we wish to say with her: “Let it be to me according to your word”. We must respond with faith and hope to the great revelation of God’s love for the world.
4. In saying this prayer to the Blessed Virgin Mary, I wish to place under her loving protection the whole Church in New Zealand. I offer to her care all the beloved faithful of this land, together with their bishops, priests and religious. I pray, Holy Mother of God, that you will help the poor and the suffering, obtain pardon for the sinners, bring joy to the afflicted and lead all your sons and daughters in New Zealand to the happiness of eternal life, with the angels and the saints, in the Kingdom of Jesus, your Son. Amen.
  © Copyright 1986 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
APOSTOLIC PILGRIMAGE TO INDIA
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Basilica of our Lady of the Mount, Bandra
Sunday, 9 February 1986
  Dear Brothers and Sisters in Christ,
1. It gives me particularly great joy to come to this Basilica of our Lady of the Mount, as my predecessor Pope Paul VI did before me. This shrine is hallowed by the feet of pilgrims who make their way here in their thousands to pay homage to the Blessed Mother of God.
Even before coming, I had heard so much about the devotion to Our Lady that is characteristic of the people of India. The Basilica here in Bandra is a symbol of this. In addition, there are other famous Marian shrines such as Our Lady of Graces in Sardhana, Our Lady of Lourdes in Vijayawada and Our Lady of Health in Vailankanni. When the history of the Church in India is written, this Marian aspect of your spiritual lives will occupy a place of honour and renowned.
2. Mary of Nazareth is indeed worthy of our veneration and filial love. “In an utterly singular way she co-operated by her obedience, faith, hope and ardent charity in the Saviour’s work” (Lumen Gentium, 61). She changed all of human history by her «Fiat», by her free consent to the will of God. By this act of faith and love, she allowed herself to be transformed by God. Submitting herself totally to God, she agreed to be the Mother of the Redeemer of the world: the eternal Word became flesh, God became man. From the moment of the Annunciation, she dedicated herself to her Son, to his person and to his work, to the mystery of the Redemption which he accomplished. From that day forward and for all time, she assists her Son in his mission of salvation. In every age, Mary is close to the Church, the Body of Christ. And thus, she is rightly called “Mother of the Church”.
3. In her role as our Mother in faith, Mary cares for all the faithful, helping them to come to her Son, to trust in the Father’s providence, to open their minds and hearts to the Holy Spirit, to share actively in the mission of the Church. By her prayer and inspiration Mary helps the Church to carry on the work of Christ in the world.
In a special way, the Blessed Virgin assists our efforts to promote reconciliation and peace in the world and to strengthen the unity of all Christians. She does this by directing our attention to her divine Son and by instructing us as she instructed those at the wedding feast of Cana: “Do whatever he tells you” (Io. 2, 5). If we remain faithful in doing what Christ tells us, if we continually say with Mary “Let it be to me according to your word” (Luc. 1, 38), then there will be peace and reconciliation in the world, and we shall be one in Christ.
It is precisely in view of the role of Mary in the work of Christian unity that the Second Vatican Council exhorted the faithful in the following words: “Let the entire body of the faithful pour forth persevering prayer to the Mother of God and Mother of humanity. Let them implore that she who aided the beginnings of the Church by her prayers may now, exalted as she is in heaven above all the saints and angels, intercede with her Son in the fellowship of all the saints. May she do so until all the peoples of the human family, whether they are honoured with the name of Christian or whether they still do not know their Saviour, are happily gathered together in peace and harmony into the one People of God, for the glory of the Most Holy and Undivided Trinity” (Lumen Gentium, 69). Amen.
  © Copyright 1986 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
APOSTOLIC PILGRIMAGE TO INDIA
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Indira Gandhi Stadium, Delhi (India)
Sunday, 2 February 1986
  Throughout the world, in homes and churches, in convents and seminaries, in fields and in cities, at work or at rest, many Christians pause at midday to pray the Angelus, to lift their minds and hearts for a few moments to the Lord, and to give thanks with the Mother of God for the mystery of the Incarnation.
“The Angel of the Lord declared unto Mary,
and she conceived of the Holy Spirit”.
Mary conceived the eternal Son of God.
“And the World became flesh and dwelt among us”.
It is this great mystery that we ponder each day in the Angelus: God became man in the womb of Mary.
Through this great mystery, all human life was changed. Humanity received a new dignity. God became one with us in all things but sin, so that we might become one with God. The moment Mary said yes - “Be it done unto me according to your word” - God came down to earth, and the life of every man and woman was lifted up. We human beings were brought close to God by God drawing near to us. But not only that - we were also brought closer to one another.
The Eternal Word, the Son of God, was made man and became our brother in the flesh. As a result, we are closely bound together as brothers and sisters in the Lord. In the Incarnation, every man became our brother, every woman became our sister. That is why Saint John writes: “If any one says, ‘I love God’, and hates his brother, he is a liar; for he who does not love his brother whom he has seen, cannot love God whom he has not seen. And this commandment we have from him, that he who loves God should love his brother also” (1 Io. 4, 20-21).
At this Angelus, then, we join Mary, our Mother, in praising God for the Incarnation, and we ask our heavenly Father for the grace to love all our brothers and sisters as Christ has loved us.
  © Copyright 1986 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
APOSTOLIC JOURNEY
TO THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND CANADA
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
San Antonio, Texas
Sunday, 13 September 1987
  1.
At the end of this Eucharistic celebration, I invite you to join me in praying the Angelus. Whenever we turn to Mary the Mother of God in prayer, we are reminded that she is "full of grace". This is how the Angel Gabriel greeted her at the time of the Annunciation: "Hail, full of grace, the Lord is with you" (Luc. 1, 28). And indeed these words of the angel are true. Of all the people God has created, she alone was always free from sin. From the first moment of her existence she was in communion with the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit. Mary responded to this great gift of God with openness and generosity: "Let it be done to me", she said, "according to your word" (Ibid. 1, 38).
2.
Like Mary, we too have been given the gift of God’s grace, even though we have not received its fullness. Like Mary, we are called to respond, to be open to God’s word, to be generous in saying yes to God. For us this means doing God’s will, living according to his commandments, serving our neighbour, avoiding sin. In other words, with Mary we must respond with love to God’s love.
Let us turn then to Mary whom we honour under many titles, but here today in San Antonio under her special title of Our Lady of Guadalupe.
  © Copyright 1987 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana 
 
APOSTOLIC JOURNEY TO ZIMBABWE, BOTSWANA, LESOTHO,
SWAZILAND AND MOZAMBIQUE
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Race course of Borrowdale Park, Harare (Zimbabwe)
Sunday
, 11 September 1988
  At the conclusion of this Sacred Liturgy, let us turn with filial love to Mary, the Mother of God, the Mother of the Eucharistic Christ.
In the Liturgy of the Word in today’s Mass, we recalled Peter’s response to Jesus: “You are the Christ, the Son of the Living God”. Peter was the first to make such a public profession of faith. But, long before Peter’s profession, Mary already believed.
You, Blessed Virgin of Nazareth, You, O woman of faith,
You listened to the message of the Angel Gabriel.
You put your trust in God’s word.
You accepted in faith that the Son whom you would conceive and bear would be called “Son of the Most High” (Luc. 1, 32). 
On this day, Mary, Help of Christians, I entrust to you in love all the people of Zimbabwe. See the faith of those gathered here in prayer. We too have received the wonderful grace of knowing and believing in Jesus, your only Son, and the Son of God.
But Mary, Our Lady of Mount Carmel, see how our faith is tested and how at times we waver. Plead with the Father on our behalf. Ask him to overshadow us with his Holy Spirit. Let the Spirit strengthen our fearful hearts and enlighten our doubting minds so that we may firmly believe, as you did, that “nothing is impossible to God” (Luc. 1, 37). 
O Mary, the Immaculate Conception,
You yourself never sinned, and from the beginning you were preserved from sin’s harmful effects on your soul. Yet you knew the depths of human suffering and the terrible extent of evil in the world, for you stood at the foot of the Cross and shared with a Mother’s pierced heart in the Passion and Death of your Son.
You know, most gentle Mother, how this nation has suffered, suffered during the War for Independence and from acts of violence in various places in the years that have followed. You are Our Lady of Peace, and this day we gladly turn to you under this title.
Look upon these sons and daughters of yours, whom I confidently entrust to you today. They have known the horrors of hatred and violence. They hunger for justice and peace. They desire reconciliation and harmony among the tribes and races of Zimbabwe, among all the peoples of the earth.
Your beloved Son died on the Cross “to gather together in unity the scattered children of God” (Io. 11, 52). We are a people who believe that Jesus died for us all. We believe that Jesus lives for us all. We believe that he is the Prince of Peace. Pray for us, O Holy Mother of God. Obtain for us the favour of believing ever more firmly in the Victory of the Cross, and of living in loving communion with Jesus and with all our brothers and sisters.
And now, in the words of the Angelus, let us join our hearts and voices in prayer.
  © Copyright 1988 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
APOSTOLIC JOURNEY
TO THE FAR EAST AND MAURITIUS
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Seoul (Korea)
Sunday, 8 October 1989
  Brothers and Sisters in Christ,
1. We have just celebrated the Eucharist, and brought to a conclusion the Forty-fourth International Eucharistic Congress. In union with the Church throughout the world we have been joined to Jesus Christ in the “acceptable sacrifice which brings salvation to the whole world”. Together with his Mother, Mary ever Virgin, we have rejoiced in God our Saviour, for he who is mighty has done great things for his people (Cfr. Luc. 1, 47-49). 
At this midday hour, we turn to Mary, whom Christ gave to us as our Mother (Cfr. Io. 19, 27). Forever “she stands out among the poor and humble of the Lord” (Lumen Gentium, 55),  interceding on behalf of the hungry, the weak and the defenceless. She is the hope and comfort of the children of Eve. She is “the gracious Advocate”. In confidence we ask her to pray for us, that we may be made worthy of the promises of her divine Son.
2. Today in Seoul, we offer a fervent prayer that the peace of Christ will descend upon all nations and peoples. Allow me to mention in particular two peoples who are very close to my heart. Confident of Mary’s tender concern for all her children, we cannot fail to recommend to her, with deep affection, hope and sorrow, the people of North Korea and especially its Catholic community.
 We pray for those parents and children, brothers and sisters, friends and relatives who are separated, but wait with undiminished hope to be reunited as one family. May Jesus, through the intercession of his Blessed Mother, the Queen of Peace, hasten the day when all Koreans will be reconciled in mutual trust and respect, and reunited in the joy of brotherly love.
3. In this filial conversation with Mary our Mother, I also make mention of our brothers and sisters in Christ living in Mainland China. Their geographical proximity, as well as bonds of faith and culture, bring them very near to many of those assembled here. Deep within my own heart, there is always present an ardent desire to meet these brothers and sisters in order to express my cordial affection and concern for them, and to assure them of how highly they are esteemed by the other local Churches. I am deeply moved when I think of the heroic signs of fidelity to Christ and his Church which many of them have shown in these past years. Through the intercession of Mary, Help of Christians, may Christ be their consolation in every trial and in all of life’s daily challenges.
May the Lord also inspire within them a firm commitment to the delicate task of fostering reconciliation within the ecclesial community, in communion of faith with the Successor of Peter, who is the visible principle and foundation of that unity. May he encourage and sustain Christian believers there, as they seek to dedicate themselves to the pursuit of the common good and the generous service of their fellow citizens, working for the progress of their noble nation.
4. We ask Mary to draw all mankind to the Cross of Christ, our only hope of salvation. Through her prayers, may all hearts be opened to the peace of Christ – that peace which surpasses all human understanding (Cfr. Phil. 4, 7). And may we who have received so many of God’s gifts through her intercession, imitate her example and offer ourselves in union with her Son for the salvation and peace of the entire world.
  © Copyright 1989 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
APOSTOLIC JOURNEY TO SANTIAGO DE COMPOSTELA AND ASTURIAS
 ON THE OCCASION OF FOURTH WORLD YOUTH DAY
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS

Santiago de Compostela
Sunday, 20 August 1989
  As an epilogue to this Fourth World Youth Day, we are now going to pray the beautiful Marian prayer, the Angelus. In so doing, we entrust to our heavenly Mother the intentions and resolutions which have accompanied our pilgrimage to this hospitable city of Santiago de Compostela.
1. Beloved young people, you have come in great numbers and from so many nations and peoples, many of you at great sacrifice. From the bottom of my heart I wish to thank you for this gesture. I wish to extend this due thanks to your loved ones as well who have enabled you to start out on this "Jacobean Route" and the Way to Santiago, and also to the organizers of the different events and activities. Thank you, many thanks to all of you!
2. I now invite you to turn your hearts and your glance to the Blessed Virgin Mary, guide and shining beacon on the sea of life. In a few moments we are going to invoke her together, with serene confidence, asking her to strengthen our desires, now that we are about to conclude this important meeting near the tomb of the Apostle St James. With the motherly help of the "Morning Star", this pilgrimage must reinforce in our hearts the "new tomorrow" that humanity incessantly desires, the firm conviction that Jesus Christ is "the Way, the Truth and the Life". He alone gives full meaning to human history.
Mary, the believer "par excellence", is "a type of the Church in the order of faith, of charity and of perfect union with Christ" (Lumen Gentium, 63). Hence the singular figure of the Blessed Virgin is an example for all the faithful, and in a particular way for you, dear young people. Our Lady is proposed by the Church as a model of life, a life lived according to the will of God. Her pilgrimage on the path of earthly existence was a decided, total and responsible "yes" to the Lord's indications. We recall Nazareth, Bethlehem, the flight into Egypt, Cana of Galilee, Golgotha, Pentecost in the Upper Room in Jerusalem. These are stages in a pilgrimage carried out with deep faith. Blessed are you, Mary, because you have believed... because of this all generations will call you blessed! (cfr. Lk 1: 45, 48).
You have decided to follow Jesus, the Son of God. How many times Our Mother has lovingly brought us to her Son! To Jesus through Mary! From heaven the Blessed Virgin looks down on you with affection and protects you in the difficulties of life. Mother of redeemed humanity, example of love, of self-denial and of service, grant that these children of yours who acclaim you as Mother may, after their earthly pilgrimage, be worthy to be with you in the Kingdom of life!
It is more and more necessary that, even in the most remote parts of the world, there be witnesses, young witnesses of the Gospel, who without fear or dread of difficult situations or circumstances, are able to live out the demands of the faith cohesively, with their gaze fixed on personal sanctification and the practice of fraternal charity.
May this day encourage you to collaborate decidedly in God's salvific plan, in a world which is religiously secularized and socially fragmented, so that the Good News of Salvation may reach all people. Proclaim the unique Truth of Christ with determination.
3. "Respice stellam, voca Mariam!"
Look at the star, invoke Mary!
May the Blessed Virgin be now and always your star and protection. Love her as the Mother that she is, Mother of Christ and our Mother! And may St James make you faithful and convinced witnesses; witnesses of pardon, peace and mercy; witnesses who choose to build upon the solid foundation of love and goodness; witnesses who await the coming of the Lord with patient and, at times, sorrowful confidence.
Mother of mankind, teach us to say AMEN!
  © Copyright 1989 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
    
APOSTOLIC JOURNEY
TO NORWAY, ICELAND, FINLAND,
DENMARK AND SWEDEN
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Reykjavik (Iceland)
Sunday, 4 June 1989
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
As we conclude this Liturgy, the traditional hour of the Angelus summons us in prayer before Mary, the Mother of Jesus and our Mother. We have heard and repeated today the words of the centurion: “Lord,... I am not worthy to have you come under my roof” (Luc. 7, 6). At the Annunciation Mary experienced a similar sense of unworthiness, but she accepted God’s will by saying “Fiat” – “Let it be to me according to your word” (Ibid. 1, 38). To her I now entrust all the people here in Iceland and throughout the Nordic countries:
Our Lady, Help of Christians, you know how fervently the people of the North call on you in moments of joy, anxiety and fear:
– fishermen pray to you – Star of the Sea!
– travellers invoke your intercession – Lady of the Wayside!
– parents pray to you to protect and guide their children
– Mother of Good Counsel!
– soldiers of the Northern countries who serve with the Peacekeeping Forces of the United Nations call upon you
– Lady of Peace!
Blessed Mary, look with kindness today upon every home. Obtain for families the joy and harmony that filled the house at Nazareth. Unite parents in faithful love and bless all children. Help young adults to respond generously and faithfully to Christ. Teach everyone the value of forgiveness and fraternal love.
O Mother of Mercy, comfort the elderly and the sick. Help the injured and handicapped. Assist those who suffer from cancer, AIDS, or any incurable illness. Give hope and fresh courage to all who are afraid, depressed, lost or unwanted.
Touch the hearts of all who have given up the faith. Call them home! Tell them that the Father loves them and waits for them with open arms. Tell them the Church needs them!
Our lady of the North, strengthen the bishops, priests and religious of these lands. May they be filled with zeal and compassion, and may they always bear authentic witness to the Kingdom of God. Look with love upon all our Christian brothers and sisters. Heal the wounds of division. Help us to rejoice one day in unity.
Mother of God, you are the highest honour of our race! Spread your mantle of love over us so that in all things we too may say “fiat” – Let God’s will be done.
  © Copyright 1989 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
APOSTOLIC JOURNEY TO TANZANIA, BURUNDI,
RWANDA AND IVORY COAST
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Dar-es-Salaam
Sunday, 2 September 1990
  Dear brothers and sisters,
as we bring this solemn Liturgy to a close, we turn to the Blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of the Redeemer, to rededicate your country to her maternal care.
Maria Mtakatifu, Mama wa Kanisa, Mama wa binadamu woteMimi, Yohane Paulo wa Pili, Halifa wa Mtume Petro, ninawaweka watu wote wa Tanzania chini ya ulinzi wako wa upeindo.
(Holy Mary, Mother of the Church Mother of all mankind: I, John Paul the Second, Successor of the Apostle Peter, entrust the people of Tanzania to your loving protection).
As your devoted sons and daughters, they renew their consecration to you as a people and as a youthful nation on this Continent of promise. Upon their legitimate hopes and aspirations, both present and future, I invoke your powerful intercession as Mother of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.
Mama wa Familia Takatifu ya Nazareti:
(Mother of the Holy Family of Nazareth):
You are also the Mother of "the Church in the home". I implore your aid upon the families of your devoted Tanzanian people. Comfort them in their sufferings and strengthen them with the light, joy, serenity and courage that marked your family life with Jesus and Joseph.
Maria Mtakatifu, Mama wa Mungu:
(Holy Mary, Mother of God):
I earnestly entrust to you the life of the Church in Tanzania. I commend to your solicitude each of the local Churches so that, gathered by their Pastors in the Holy Spirit through the Gospel and the Eucharist, they may truly reflect the presence of the one holy, catholic and apostolic Church of Christ. In your motherly love, assist the bishops, priests and religious to live generously and fully the vocations which they have received in the heart of the Church, to serve God’s people and bear witness to the truths and moral demands of Christ’s kingdom. In a special way, remember those who have been ordained today, that they may be worthy servants and heralds of the Gospel.
Malkia wa Amani:
(Queen of Peace):
Hear the prayers of your faithful Tanzanian people for peace and harmony in their country and throughout Africa. Teach them the ways of forgiveness and reconciliation in their families and in social and political life. May all Tanzanians know how to accept each other in mutual respect and trust, working tirelessly for the development of their country in universal justice and solidarity.
Maria, Mama yetu, upokee tendo hili la kuiweka Tanzania chini ya ulinzi wako na utujalie kupata hayo tunayoyaomba kutoka kwa Moyo wa Mwanao, Bwana wetu Yesu Kristu. Amina.
(Mary, our Mother, accept this act of entrusting and obtain what we ask from the Heart of your Son, our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen). 
 
PASTORAL JOURNEY TO MALTA
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CAELI
St Paul's Church, Rabat
Sunday, 27 May 1990
  Dear Brothers and Sisters in Christ,
1. The sick are a very special part of Christ’s Body, the Church. This morning I am pleased to meet some representatives of the people in Malta and Gozo who are elderly or suffering from various forms of illness. In greeting you, I make my own the beautiful words which we find in the First Letter of Peter: "Rejoice in so far as you share Christ’s sufferings, that you may also rejoice and be glad when his glory is revealed" (1Petr. 4, 13). Let us indeed praise Almighty God for the many ways in which he strengthens us in hope and gives us his consolation, even amid the trials and sufferings that accompany our life here on earth.
The Church’s concern for the sick derives from the example of Jesus himself, who in preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom went about "healing every disease and every infirmity among the people" (Matth. 4, 23). By his many miracles, Jesus showed how close God is to each of us, and how great is his power to bring healing and salvation to those who call upon him in faith. In every age, the Church seeks to carry on Christ’s saving mission by caring for the physical and spiritual needs of the infirm. She knows that God’s grace is made perfect in weakness, and that in her suffering members the saving power of Christ’s Cross is mysteriously present and effective.
2. Not far from us is the Grotto where, according to a venerable popular tradition, Saint Paul lived during his stay in Malta. As you know, Saint Paul rejoiced in the many sufferings he endured for the Gospel. He understood that only by suffering with Christ do we come to share in the power of his Resurrection (Cfr. Phil. 3, 10-11).
Our Catholic faith teaches that in the communion of saints the members of the Church are united with each other in a profound spiritual solidarity. Our prayers, our sufferings and our joys affect others in ways that are known fully to God alone. Through the life of grace, each of us is given an opportunity to cooperate with Jesus in bringing the saving power of his Cross to bear on the needs of our brothers and sisters. As Paul himself put it, we can "complete what is lacking in Christ’s afflictions for the sake of his Body, ...the Church" (Col. 1, 24).
When people are sick, or burdened by troubles, they are often tempted to think only of their own problems. But faith invites us to look deeper, and to see the immense good that we can do for our neighbour by offering our sufferings in union with Jesus as a pleasing sacrifice to God our Father for the needs of all mankind. How many people today stand in need of our prayers! Whether we pray for our family or our friends, for peace among nations or harmony between individuals, for an end to problems such as hunger, disease and drug abuse, we can be confident that our prayers will be heard.
3. Dear friends: on this occasion I wish to say a special word of thanks to the individuals and groups who minister to the elderly and infirm in Malta. Together with Government agencies, Church organizations such as the Kummissjoni Morda of Maltese Catholic Action, Caritas and the Association for the Transport of the Sick to Lourdes are dedicated to assisting Malta’s sick. In her homes for the elderly, the handicapped and those recovering from drug addiction the Church is making a notable contribution to the spiritual and physical well-being of Maltese society.
My thoughts also turn to those many family members, friends and volunteers who comfort and support the elderly and sick by their presence and love. Your generosity and compassion for your brothers and sisters in need reflect the image of the Good Samaritan (cfr. Luc. 10, 30-37), whose compassion for his neighbour was the expression of a profound love and solidarity (Cfr. Ioannis Pauli PP. II Salvifici Doloris, 28).
In a moment we shall recite together the beautiful hymn: "Regina Coeli", which invites the entire Church to share in the joy of the Blessed Virgin Mary at the Resurrection of Jesus her Son. Even when she stood at the foot of his Cross, Mary never ceased to trust that God’s promises would be fulfilled. For this reason, Mary is the model of all disciples as they seek to follow the Lord in unwavering faith, hope and love. With great confidence in God’s infinite mercy and goodness, then, let us join Mary on this last Sunday in May, Mary’s month, in praying for all who bear a heavy burden of suffering that they may come to know the joy of his eternal victory.
  © Copyright 1990 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana 
 
APOSTOLIC JOURNEY TO SENEGAL, THE GAMBIA AND GUINEA
ANGELUS
Independence Stadium, Banjul (The Gambia)
Sunday, 23 February 1992
  Neyu nala Mariama fes nga yiw! (Hail Mary, full of grace!).
At the conclusion of this Holy Mass, let us turn with love to Mary, the Mother of Jesus and the Mother of all his disciples. From the beginning, Mary has accompanied the Church in The Gambia along her pilgrim way. Your love for her is expressed in the dedication of your Cathedral to her Assumption, in your pilgrimages to her Shrine at Kungkujang–Miriam and in your strong devotion to the prayer of the Rosary. Even now Mary is present among you with a Mother’s love, drawing you nearer to Christ her Son.
Marie Linguer u Jama! (Mary, Queen of Peace!).
To you I entrust the sons and daughters of The Gambia. May they always work together in building a society of justice, peace and brotherhood. May the spirit of reconciliation and true solidarity take ever deeper root in this land and in the hearts of all its people.
Marie ndey u njabot gu sela ga cha Nazaret!
(Mary, Mother of the Holy Family of Nazareth!).
Watch over the parents and children of The Gambia. May families be strengthened in unity and love, and become schools of wisdom and virtue for the moral and civic leaders of the future. May Christian families be true "domestic Churches", where all find encouragement to grow in faith, in holiness and in the knowledge of God’s will.
Marie ndey u Musalkat bi ak ndey u jangu bi!
(Mary, Mother of the Redeemer and Mother of the Church!).
May Gambian Christians become the salt of the earth and the light of the world! By your prayers, may all Christians be brought to a deeper knowledge of the mystery of Christ, a more effective witness to the Gospel and a fuller communion in the one Spirit. May many young people respond generously to the Lord’s call to serve his people in the priesthood and in consecrated life!
Marie sunyu ndey! (Mary, our Mother!).
All generations call you blessed, because you believed that the Lord’s words to you would be fulfilled. Look upon all who long for God’s grace to be poured out in their lives, in their families and upon this beloved nation!
And now, in the words of the "Angelus", let us join our hearts and voices and lift our prayers to the Holy Mother of God, that we may be made worthy of the promises of Christ.
   
8th WORLD YOUTH DAY
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Cherry Creek State Park, Denver
Solemnity of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary
Sunday, 15 August 1993
  I now invite all taking part in this concluding Liturgy of the "World Youth Day", and all who are in contact with us through radio and television, to turn in spirit to Mary, Mother of the Redeemer, and to join in reciting the "Angelus" prayer. This traditional prayer invites us to meditate on Mary’s own pilgrimage of faith.
With trust we appeal to her:
Mary, you are the "model of the Church in faith, charity and perfect union with Christ" (Lumen Gentium, 63). You freely accepted God’s will, made known to you at the Annunciation. You bore in your womb the Word made flesh, who dwelt among us as your Son. You watched him grow "in wisdom and age and grace" (Luc 2,52) in the home of Nazareth. Your path of discipleship led even to the foot of the Cross, where Jesus made you the Mother of all his followers (Cfr. Io 19,27).
Mary, you are the Mother of the Lord of life who stood beneath the Tree of life. At the Cross you became our spiritual mother and, from heaven, you continue to intercede for us who are still making our way towards the Father’s house (Cfr. Lumen Gentium, 62).
Mary, Mother of the Church, in union with you we thank the Blessed Trinity for all that this "World Youth Day" has accomplished in the lives of the young people who have followed the Holy Year Cross to Denver.
Mary, Immaculate Virgin, pray for these young people that they may "have life and have it to the full" (Cfr. Io 10,10). Accompany them as they go forth to be heralds of that divine Life which alone can satisfy the hunger of the human heart! Like you, may they see in the Cross of Christ the call of Divine Love which turns death into life, despair into hope, and sadness into unending joy.
Blessed Mother, assist all the young people who are struggling to give a definitive and responsible "Yes" to the Lord’s call to the priesthood, to the religious life, or to a special consecration in the Church. Obtain for them the courage and hope they need to overcome all obstacles and to follow closely in the footsteps of your Divine Son.
We ask you to watch over all of us gathered here as we continue our pilgrim way to the true source of life. For this pilgrimage must continue! It must continue in our lives. It must continue in the life of the Church as she looks towards the Third Christian Millennium. It must continue as "a new Advent", a time of hope and expectation, until the return of the Lord in glory. Our celebration of this "World Youth Day" has been a stop along the way, a moment of prayer and refreshment, but our journey must lead us on.
Today I wish to announce that the next "World Youth Day" will take place at the beginning of 1995 in Manila in the Philippines. In this way, our pilgrimage will take us to the vast and vital Continent of Asia. The Holy Year Cross will lead us to a meeting with the faithful, generous people of the Philippines.
Mary of the new Advent, we implore your protection on the the preparations that will now begin for that next Meeting.
Mary, "full of grace", we entrust the next "World Youth Day" to you!
Mary, assumed into Heaven, we entrust the young people of the world to you!
  After the Angelus:
The time has come for us to say goodbye, until we meet again.
I wish to thank all those unnamed people, the members of the police, the fire–department, the citizens of Denver, who have been our hosts and helpers during the "World Youth Day".
I also mention Archbishop Stafford and all the volunteers of the Church here in Denver who have worked for months to prepare this Day. Our gratitude goes to the local radio stations and the translators who have made it possible to follow the "World Youth Day" in the principal languages, to everyone in radio and television who are bringing "World Youth Day" to audiences in many countries.
My gratitude goes to Cardinal Pironio and the Pontifical Council for the Laity, who are responsible for organizing the "World Youth Day" at the international level.
To Archbishop Keeler, President of the Bishops’ Conference and all the Bishops for their cooperation: thanks to the whole Church in the United States. To Archbishop Keeler, President of the Bishops’ Conference, and Monsignor Lynch and all their staff, to all the Cardinals and the Bishops for their cooperation. Thanks to the whole Church in the United States. A special thanks to all the Cardinals and Bishops who have become pilgrims together with their young people from all the continents. The "World Youth Day" has been a great event, and there has been a wonderful exchange of spiritual gifts and experiences between all the young people present. For all of this we must give praise and thanks to God. I wish to express my deepest and warm appreciation to the representatives of the other Churches: Christian Churches and Communities, as well as to the representatives of the various religious traditions who have taken such an active part in "World Youth Day".
In Spanish:
¡Cómo no agradecer a esa parte de la Iglesia en Estados Unidos que habla español la gran participación de jóvenes en este encuentro! Y a todos los que han llegado de México, de América Central, de América del Sur, de España. Dios sea alabado por vuestra fe, vuestra generosidad y vuestra voluntad de vivir de la vida que Cristo os da. Llevad el saludo entrañable del Papa a vuestras familias, a vuestros amigos, a los pueblos y naciones de donde venís.
In French:
Au terme de cette rencontre, vous tous, jeunes pèlerins de langue française, je vous salue cordialement et je vous confie au Seigneur, avec l’immense espérance que ce temps fort de partage et de prière à Denver contribue à raviver sans cesse votre engagement et votre mission d’annoncer l’Evangile à tous les jeunes de vos différents pays. Que l’Esprit Saint poursuive en vous son œuvre! Que Dieu vous bénisse et vous garde sous sa constante protection!
In German:
Einen herzlichen Grub richte ich an Euch, liebe deutschsprachige Pilger, die Ihr nach Denver gekommen seid. Wenn Ihr jetzt in die Heimat zurückkehrt und Euch den Herausforderungen des Alltags stellen mübt, besinnt Euch auf die in diesen Tagen gewonnenen Erkenntnisse. Vor allem denkt daran, dab Christus der wahre Quell des Lebens, der Freude und der Glückseligkeit ist. Gebt diese Überzeugung Euren Mitmenschen weiter. Arbeitet am Aufbau einer Zivilisation, die alle Menschen achtet. Durch die Gnade Christi seid Zeugen der Frohbotschaft des Heils.
In Portuguese:
A todos os jovens de expressão portuguesa: " Adeus! Até à próxima! ". Nesta minha despedida, quero encorajar–vos a que vos torneis sempre mais verdadeiros apóstolos e missionários da Boa Nova de Jesus Cristo. Eu espero que levareis convosco o entusiasmo de um novo compromisso ao serviço da Igreja e do desenvolvimento humano dos vossos irmãos e irmãs. Louvado seja Nosso Senhor Jesus Cristo!
In Polish:
Drodzy Młodzi Rodacy! W czasie Światowego Dnia Młodzieży w Denver rozważaliście wspólnie ze swymi kolegami słowa Chrystusa: “Ja przyszedłem po to, aby miały życie i miały je w obfitości” (Io. 10, 10). W słowach tych Chrystus odpowiada na najgłębsze pragnienie ludzkiego serca. Każda i każdy z Was pragnie życia, i to życia “w obfitości”. Otwierajcie się więc coraz bardziej na ten Chrystusowy dar! Dzielcie się nim z innymi! Badźcie autentycznymi apostołami życia, które przyniósł Chrystus! Nasza Ojczyzna, która przeżywa okres historycznych przemian, takich apostołów życia bardzo potrzebuje!
Kończy się Światowy Dzień Młodzieży, a dla Was – jego uczestników – rozpoczyna się misja, którą powierza Wam Chrystus. On na Was liczy. Tym, co tu przeżyliście, dzielcie się ze swymi kolegami i koleżankami w środowiskach, w których żyjecie, uczycie się czy pracujecie. Na tym apostolskim szlaku niech Wam towarzyszy opieka i wstawiennictwo Maryi, którą czcimy jako Królową Apostołów.
***
I have spoken too much. But you are many and I thank you. I thank you with all my heart. I thank you for being here, for receiving from Christ – you are here for Christ! – you received from him life, abundant life.
We all have celebrated, participated in the Eucharist. What is the Eucharist? Christ has given us life, his life, divine life, the pilgrim life – he was a pilgrim. He was a man – divine life, he is the Son of God.
He gives us his life, his divine life, his eternal life. But he not only gives us his life, he also receives every one of us. We are accepted by him. That is communion: Christ is communion, Eucharist is sacrifice and Eucharist is communion.
We receive him, but he receives us and that is life, the full human life, the sacramental life, but that is also the future life, eternal life.
Thank you, Lord Jesus Christ, for life.
Thank you for all of us; I say it again, thank you, thank you for the life you gave us and that you are giving us, you are permitting us. Thank you through your Mother, Our Lady. In the day of her Assumption, thank you, Jesus Christ, the Son of the Eternal Father. In the name of the Father, the Son and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
 
PASTORAL VISIT TO BENIN, UGANDA AND KHARTOUM
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS

Shrine of the Martyrs of Uganda in Namugongo, Kampala
Sunday, 17 February 1993
  At the end of this Mass we turn with love to the Blessed Virgin Mary and prepare to say the Angelus. From his Cross, Jesus gave Mary to his followers to be their Mother (Cfr. Jn 19,25-27). From the very beginning of the Church’s presence in this land, Uganda’s Christians have been sustained in their witness to the Gospel by the prayers of the Mother of God. The Uganda’s Martyrs gave proof of their profound devotion to Mary by their daily recitation of the Angelus and the Rosary during the time of their imprisonment. In union with them and with all the Saints, let us now entrust to Mary’s maternal protection this beloved country of Uganda and its people.
Mary, Queen of Peace! To you we commend the men, women and children of Uganda. Through your prayers, may the Spirit of God grant lasting peace and prosperity to their nation. May the light of Christ cast out the spiritual darkness which breeds selfishness, violence, hatred for others and contempt for their rights. May all hearts be opened to the power of God’s love. May those divided by ethnic or political antagonisms learn to work together in order to build a society of justice, peace and freedom for their children.
Mary, Queen of Martyrs! To you we commend the Christians of this country. May the noble example of Saints Charles Lwanga and the Uganda’s Martyrs inspire them to offer their lives as a sacrifice pleasing to God. May their faith in Christ be seen in the holiness of their lives and in their charity towards their brothers and sisters. Strengthen priests and Religious in fidelity and apostolic zeal, and grant that more and more young people may respond generously to God’s call to serve him in the Church. By your loving intercession, may Christians be beacons of hope, letting their light shine before men, a leaven of Gospel values working for the spiritual and moral renewal of Ugandan society.
Mary, Mother of all who believe! May all Christ’s followers in this country draw ever closer together in a spirit of mutual respect and cooperation. May they bear ever more fraternal witness to the reconciling love of Jesus the Redeemer. Impelled by the Spirit of love, may they help spread the light of the Gospel to all the people of Uganda.
Mary, Mother of Sorrows! Look with mercy on those who suffer. Be close to the victims of violence and terror, and console those who mourn. May Jesus your Son grant comfort and peace to all the sick and dying, and may he strengthen those devoted to their physical and spiritual care.
Mary, Queen of Africa! Lead all people into the Lord’s Kingdom of holiness, truth and life. You who freely said "yes" to God and became the Virgin Mother of his only Son, remain ever close to your children in Uganda. May they be reborn in hope, and may God’s saving plan be fulfilled in them. Through them, may all Africa come to know and love the name of Jesus Christ our Saviour.
 
APOSTOLIC JOURNEY
TO THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Baltimore - Sunday, 8 October 1995
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
As our celebration of the Eucharist draws to a close, we turn with love to the Blessed Virgin Mary and prepare to recite the Angelus prayer. Together let us implore the protection of the Mother of God upon the United States and upon its people.
Mary Immaculate, conceived without sin: Patroness of the United States! From the first moment of your existence you were called by God to be the Mother of his Incarnate Son. Model of our faith, you watched over the Incarnate Son of God as he grew in wisdom, age and grace. Look upon the people of this great nation, so richly blessed by God with material and spiritual resources. May they draw fresh inspiration from the highest ideals of their democratic tradition and contribute to the building of a world of solidarity, justice and peace, a world in which everyone is welcomed as a fellow–guest at the great banquet of life.
Mary our Queen: Patroness of the Archdiocese of Baltimore! You stood beside your Son at the foot of the Cross and rejoiced in his Resurrection from the dead. Model of our hope, you awaited the fulfilment of Christ’s promises at Pentecost and now share the fullness of life in his eternal Kingdom. Look upon all who are united to your Son in Baptism and are called to share in his royal mission. May they be a leaven of the Kingdom of God in American society, humbly serving the needs of their brothers and sisters and bearing faithful witness to the splendor of Christ’s truth and to the saving power of his Gospel.
Mary, Mother of the Church: Mother of Christians! The Lord has entrusted all his disciples to you to be our Mother. Model of Christian love, you contemplate your Son in glory and intercede for the members of his Body on earth. Look upon the Church in the United States at the approach of the Third Christian Millennium. Through penance, prayer and active charity, may Christ’s followers meet the challenges of the new evangelization and work for the authentic renewal of human society in accordance with the truth of God’s word. As they work together with all men and women of good will, may they be joyful heralds and servants of the Gospel of life!
Blessed Virgin Mary! Commending America and its people to your intercession we now pray.
 
 10th WORLD YOUTH DAY
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Rizal Park of Manila (Philippines)
Sunday, 15 January 1995
  My dear friends,
The Tenth World Youth Day is coming to an end and we must say good–bye until the next time. I wish to thank everyone who made this great meeting possible: the generous citizens of Manila who have hosted and assisted us during these days, the police, the fire–department, the medical personnel, the broadcasters of radio and television.
We are all grateful to Cardinal Sin, the Archbishop of Manila, and to all the volunteers who have put so much effort into this event.
A special word of recognition goes to Cardinal Pironio and the Pontifical Council for the Laity in appreciation of all that they do in organizing the World Youth Days.
I thank Cardinal Vidal and the President of the Bishops’ Conference, Bishop Morelos, along with the entire Philippine Hierarchy, and all the Cardinals and Bishops who have come from other parts of the world and there are still more: good sign!
I also wish to say a warm word of thanks to President Ramos and the members of the Government: and to the Mayor of Manila and his collaborators. Very, very grateful. They have taken the World Youth Day to heart and have been most kind and helpful.
Above all, I wish to thank you, young people girls and boys. Your commitment to Christ and the Church is a source of hope for all of us, and a challenge to your leaders and your Bishops to be close to you and to work with you for a better Christian community and for a better world.
And now I try to pass to the different languages, not all the languages of the forum but the majority of the languages spoken in the forum.
  After the Angelus:
Greeting to youth from Ireland and Sarajevo
I also greet a group from Ireland.
Among the many messages I have received there is one I wish to mention, from the young people of Sarajevo, who offer their sufferings for the World Youth Day. Let us pray for them. 
Greeting to youth from the United States of America
I extend a special greeting to the large group from the United States; in a sense, you are returning the visit we made to Denver for the Eighth World Youth Day. Two years ago, in Denver, we meditated on the newness of "life" which came into the world through Jesus Christ, the Son of God and the Lord of History. This year, here in Manila, we have reflected on how that new life, received in Baptism, demands that we become disciples of Christ, apostles of his Gospel, sharing our faith with others. Two years from now, in 1997, we shall journey together to Paris, France, to continue to reflect on the Lord’s words to us. May the Holy Spirit guide our footsteps to that next stage of our pilgrimage. Au revoir! Until we meet again! It is a continuation. Evviva Denver! Mabuhay Denver! Mabuhay Manila! Mabuhay Paris! Mabuhay!
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS - FEAST OF THE HOLY FAMILY
Sunday, 29 December 1996
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. On this first Sunday after Christmas, the Church is celebrating the Feast of the Holy Family.
As at the crib, in a glance of faith we embrace together the divine Child and the persons beside him: his most holy Mother and Joseph, his putative father. What light shines from this Christmas “group icon”! A light of mercy and salvation for the whole world, a light of truth for every person, for the human family and for individual families. How lovely it is for spouses to be reflected in the Virgin Mary and her husband Joseph! How comforting for parents, especially if they have a small baby! How enlightening for engaged couples, struggling with their plans for life!
To gather round the Bethlehem grotto contemplating there the Holy Family, enables us to appreciate the gift of family intimacy in a special way, and spurs us to offer human warmth and concrete solidarity in those unfortunately numerous situations which, for various reasons, lack peace, harmony, in a word, lack “family”.
2. The message that comes from the Holy Family is first of all a message of faith: the family of Nazareth is a home which truly centres on God. For Mary and Joseph, this choice of faith becomes concrete in their service to the Son of God entrusted to their care, but it is also expressed in their mutual love, rich in spiritual tenderness and fidelity.
With their life, they teach that marriage is a covenant between man and woman, a covenant that involves reciprocal fidelity and rests upon their common trust in God. Such a noble, profound and definitive covenant, as to constitute for believers the sacrament of love of Christ and of the Church. The spouses’ fidelity stands like a solid rock on which the children’s trust rests.
When parents and children together breathe this atmosphere of faith they have a ready energy that enables them to face even difficult trials, as the Holy Family’s experience shows.
3. It is necessary to nourish this atmosphere of faith. In this perspective preparations are being made for the Second World Meeting with Families which is to take place in Rio de Janeiro on 4-5 October 1997. It will be a great celebration of the families of Latin America and of the entire world, which will renew the message launched at the first meeting that took place in Rome on the occasion of the International Year of the Family.
I commend to Mary “Queen of the family” all the world’s families, especial- ly those that are encountering serious difficulties, and I invoke her motherly protection upon them.
After praying the Angelus the Holy Father said:
The year 1996, which is about to end, marks the fourth centenary of the presence of the Popes here in Castel Gandolfo, a place which grew into a town when it became the papal residence. I am therefore pleased on this occasion to renew to you, dear inhabitants of Castel Gandolfo, my gratitude for the welcome you always reserve for the Pope and to offer you my special wishes for peace and prosperity.
After greeting the Italian pilgrims, the Holy Father concluded:
I give everyone my best wishes for the New Year: may it be illumined by the presence of Christ the Saviour, a source of peace and authentic renewal of life. Today you can hear the wind better than you can hear the Pope. The world is cold, in Italy it is colder than in the North. I wish you the courage to face this cold and to warm yourselves.
Praised be Jesus Christ!
  Copyright © Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS - FEAST OF SAINT STEPHEN
Thursday, 26 December 1996
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The joy of Christmas also fills our hearts today, while the Evangelist’s wonderful announcement continues to re-echo throughout the Church: “And the Word became flesh and dwelt among us” (Jn 1:14). The reason for our joy is precisely this: today Christ is born for us: he brings the world peace.
In the mystery of Christmas, the paschal mystery is already present. Jesus comes into the world to fulfil his mission of salvation which will culminate in his crucifixion and in the extraordinary event of his Resurrection. The martyrdom of St Stephen, which we are commemorating today, brings us somehow to contemplate this reality leading us to the heart of our faith.
Filled with the Holy Spirit, the proto-martyr Stephen was stoned for confessing his adherence to the divine King, born in the stable of Bethlehem. The Only Begotten One who comes into the world invites every believer to choose the path of life (cf. Dt 30:19). This is the profound meaning of his coming among us. Loving the Lord and obeying his voice, the deacon Stephen chose Christ, Life and Light for every man and woman. By choosing the truth, he became, at the same time, a victim of the mystery of iniquity present in the world.
2. As in times past and even in this century, the Church, in witnessing to the truth, finds herself experiencing the supreme trial of martyrdom in many of her children. She is aware that, in accepting the Son of God, she is called to share his destiny: as she lives the joy of his birth, united to him, so she is also ready to follow him in the supreme act of Paschal love.
In making room in our heart for the Son of God, who is given to us at Christmas, we also renew our will to follow him faithfully on the way of the Cross, certain that our ultimate goal is the blissful encounter with the Father.
We pray to the Virgin Mary, Mother of God and Queen of martyrs, that she may guide us and sustain us on our journey to Christ whom we contemplate in the crib.
  © Copyright 1996 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana 
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 22 December 1996
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today, the Fourth Sunday of Advent, the liturgy prepares us for Christmas, already very near, inviting us to meditate on the Gospel of the Annunciation. It is the well-known scene, also portrayed by famous artists, in which the Angel Gabriel discloses the divine plan of the Incarnation to Mary: “And behold, you will conceive in your womb and bear a son, and you shall call his name Jesus” (Lk 1:31; cf. Mt 1:21, 25).
Jesus! This name, by which Christ was known in his family and among his friends in Nazareth, exalted by the crowds and invoked by the sick during the years of his public ministry, calls to mind his identity and mission as Saviour. In fact “Jesus” means “God saves”. A blessed name, which also proved to be a sign of contradiction, ending by being written on the Cross in justification of his death sentence (cf. Jn 19:19). But this name, in the supreme sacrifice of Golgotha, shone forth as a life-giving name in which God offers the grace of reconciliation and peace to all mankind.
2. In this name the Church finds her whole good, she invokes it unceasingly, she proclaims it with ever new ardour. As the Catechism of the Catholic Church says: “The name ‘Jesus’ signifies that the very name of God is present in the person of his Son, made man for the universal and definitive redemption from sins” (432). It is the divine name which alone brings salvation “for there is no other name under heaven given among men by which we must be saved” (Acts 4:12). Jesus himself shows us the saving power of his name, giving us this consoling certitude: “If you ask anything of the Father, he will give it to you in my name” (Jn 16:23). Thus whoever calls with faith on the name of Jesus can have an experience similar to the one mentioned by the Evangelist Luke when he remarks that the crowd sought to touch him, “for power came forth from him and healed them all” (Lk 6:19).
Let us learn lovingly to repeat the Holy Name of Jesus, especially during this first year of the triennium of preparation for the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000! 1997, as is generally known, is dedicated to reflection on Christ and, repeating the name of Jesus with adoring love, putting it at the centre of our prayer, especially liturgical, we will make our own the Apostle Paul’s instruction: “and at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, in heaven and on earth” (Phil 2:10).
3. With what motherly tenderness must the Blessed Virgin, whom we contemplate awaiting her Son’s birth, have pronounced Jesus’ name! In the prayer that the Church addresses to her with the Hail Mary, she is associated with the very blessing of her Son: “Blessed are you among women, and blessed is the fruit of your womb, Jesus”. Let Mary put on our lips and impress on our hearts this most holy Name from which comes our salvation.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father made an appeal in Spanish for the release of the hostages detained in the Japanese Embassy in Lima, Peru since 17 December 1996:
In these past few days I have been anxiously following the serious events which occurred at the Japanese Embassy in Peru, where many people have been detained as hostages. Deeply united at this time with the Peruvian nation, I cannot refrain from regretting such a cruel and immoral type of coercion, as at the same time I remind everyone that violence does not build a people’s future. I ask you to pray with me that the Lord will enlighten the minds and convert the hearts of those who are responsible for such a deplorable initiative. May God also help the efforts being made to hasten a positive solution to this sad situation. May the next few days be truly “Christmassy” for all, full of peaceful ininterior happiness. I hope with all my heart that the people imprisoned in the Japanese Embassy in Lima will be able to celebrate Christmas in freedom, united with their families.
  © Copyright 1996 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS - THIRD SUNDAY OF ADVENT
Gaudete Sunday
Sunday, 14 December 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The Special Assembly for America of the Synod of Bishops ended two days ago.
It was a powerful experience of Church, in which I personally took part with great interest: an experience of deep communion between the Pastors and Ecclesial Communities in the service of the new evangelization. The Synod Assembly has likewise reinforced the bonds of solidarity which the Catholic Church can help to consolidate and extend in all the regions of the American continent.
This morning I would like symbolically to gather the proposals and projects which emerged during the Synod sessions and take them on spiritual pilgrimage to the crib in Bethlehem, to await the birth of the world’s Saviour.
2. The liturgy for the Third Sunday of Advent, also called "Gaudete" Sunday, invites us to intensify the interior pace of our pilgrimage to the Lord who comes to save us. Jesus, source of our peace, is coming. For this reason, despite difficulties and problems, we must all be full of holy optimism. St Paul urges us: "Rejoice in the Lord always; again I will say, rejoice" (Phil 4:4).
This climate of serenity and joy typical of the Christian Christmas can already be felt today, here in St Peter’s Square, thanks to the Christmas tree and the crib which are being set up. It is all the more evident thanks to the presence of so many Roman boys and girls who, following a beautiful custom, have brought figurines of the Baby Jesus from their own cribs for the Pope to bless.
I address you in particular, dear children. Christmas is the feast of a Child. Therefore it is your feast! You wait for it impatiently and prepare for it with joy, counting the days until 25 December. I gladly bless the figurines of the Christ Child and the cribs you are making at home. I bless you and the children of every part of the world, especially on the American continent, who were frequently recalled by the Synod Fathers. May the Infant Jesus fill each of them with joy, especially those tried by physical suffering or the lack of affection.
3. May Mary, the "woman of silence" who meditates on all these things, keeping them in her immaculate heart, accompany us on our Advent pilgrimage to the holy crib. May the Blessed Virgin help us to prepare for Christmas with a contemplative attitude and with renewed wonder at the ineffable mystery of God who became man so that man might return to God.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS - FEAST OF THE
IMMACULATE CONCEPTION OF MARY
Monday, 8 December  1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today, the Church celebrates the Immaculate Conception of Mary most holy, a solemn occasion so dear to the Christian people. It is a feast celebrated at the beginning of the liturgical year in the season of Advent, and it illumines the Church’s way to the Nativity of the Lord.
The background for today’s solemnity is the biblical icon of the Annunciation, when the angel’s mysterious greeting resounded: "Hail, full of grace, the Lord is with you" (Lk 1:28). "Full of grace"! Here is Mary, as God conceived of her and desired her in his inscrutable plan: a creature filled with divine love, all goodness, all beauty, all holiness.
2. "Man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart" (1 Sm 16:7). And Mary’s heart was fully disposed to the fulfilment of the divine will. This is why the Blessed Virgin is the model of Christian expectation and hope.
In contemplating the biblical scene of the Annunciation, we understand that the divine message does not catch Mary unprepared; on the contrary, it finds her watching and waiting, recollected in profound silence, in which echo the promises of the prophets of Israel, especially Isaiah's famous messianic prophecy: "Behold a young woman shall conceive and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel" (Is 7:14).
In her heart there is no shade of selfishiness: she desires nothing for herself except God’s glory and human salvation. For her, the very privilege of being preserved from original sin is not a reason to boast, but one for total service to her Son’s redemptive mission.
3. Dear brothers and sisters, humanity in our time, now preparing to enter the third millennium, finds in the Immaculate Virgin the model of expectation and the Mother of hope. She teaches us to avoid fatalism and passive resignation and every temptation to millenarianism. She teaches us to look to the future, knowing that God is coming towards us; we are called to prepare for this meeting in prayer and in watchful expectation.
In looking to you, wise Virgin, let us learn to be ready to come before Christ at the time of his glorious return. May Mary help us go to meet the Lord with living faith, joyous hope and active charity.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS - SECOND SUNDAY OF ADVENT
Sunday, 7 December  1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today we are celebrating the Second Sunday of Advent, a favourable time for allowing the Word of God to illumine our hearts and minds more deeply, so that the Holy Spirit may prepare us worthily to welcome the Lord who comes.
In today’s liturgy the figure of John the Baptist appears, the prophet sent to prepare the way for the Messiah. His voice cries out "in the wilderness" where he had withdrawn and where, as the Evangelist Luke says, "the word of God came to [him]" (Lk 3:2), making him the herald of the divine kingdom.
How can we fail to accept his powerful call to conversion, recollection and austerity at a time — like our own —ever more subject to dissipation, to inner fragmentation, to the cultivation of appearances? At first sight the "wilderness" evokes a feeling of solitude, bewilderment and fear; the "wilderness" however is also the providential place for meeting God.
2. John the Baptist’s cry re-echoes from generation to generation: "Prepare the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be brought low, and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough ways shall be made smooth" (Lk 3:4-5). How urgent and timely is this call at both the personal and social level! God wants to come and dwell with the people of every time and place, and he calls them to co-operate with him in the work of salvation.
But how? Today’s liturgy gives us the answer: we must "straighten" injustices, "fill" the void with goodness, mercy, respect and understanding, "bring low" pride, barriers and violence, and "make smooth" all that prevents people from living a free and dignified life. Only in this way can we prepare to celebrate Christmas in an authentic way.
3. On the eve of the Solemnity of the Immaculate Conception, let us turn our gaze to Mary, humble handmaid of the Lord, who co-operated with the Holy Spirit’s action.
May the Spirit himself, who inflamed her immaculate heart with faith, hope and charity, renew our consciences so that we may be ready to smooth the ways with justice and goodness and thus welcome Emmanuel, the God with us.
I wish you all a pleasant Sunday and a good week, especially the Cardinals and Bishops of North, Central and South America and the Caribbean who are gathered in Synod. This is the last and decisive week. I wish them great success.
Praised be Jesus Christ! It is a beautiful day!
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS - FIRST SUNDAY OF ADVENT
Sunday, 30 November  1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today, the First Sunday of Advent, begins the second year of immediate preparation for the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000, the year "dedicated in a particular way to the Holy Spirit and to his sanctifying presence within the community of Christ’s disciples" (Tertio millennio adveniente, n. 44) The faithful are invited to rediscover this "Gift" par excellence which is the Spirit of God, whose function in the Church can be compared to that of the soul in the human body (cf. Lumen gentium, n. 7). This year in particular, they will pray and work for the unity of the Church "to which the various gifts and charisms bestowed upon her by the Spirit are directed" (Tertio millennio adveniente, n. 47).
May God hasten the unity of all Christians, so that we may reach and cross the threshold of the Year 2000 "if not completely united, at least much closer to overcoming the divisions of the second millennium" (ibid., n. 34). Let us address this petition to the Spirit of the Lord, as we join our brothers and sisters of the Church in Constantinople, on the feast of St Andrew the Apostle, Peter’s brother.
2. This morning, while opening the year of the Holy Spirit in the Vatican Basilica, I had the joy of presenting a Cross to the many Roman missionaries who will lead the City Mission. They will visit families, present the Gospel in "listening centres" and invite young people to special moments for dialogue and the presentation of the faith, so that the whole diocesan community may be suitably prepared to live the exceptional "year of grace" which will be the Jubilee of the Year 2000.
Once again, I greet all the missionaries and assure them of my prayers for the apostolic endeavour they are about to undertake, under the guidance of the Cardinal Vicar and the Auxiliary Bishops.
I also recall that on this First Sunday of Advent the Diocese of Rome is beginning a period of raising public awareness and collecting donations for the construction of new churches. I urge Romans to support this project called: "50 churches for Rome 2000", so that the 350,000 faithful who still do not have a place of worship may see one built as soon as possible. The parish building also helps in carrying out the City Mission: it is in fact indispensable for the Church’s life to have places where the Word can be proclaimed and the sacraments celebrated. These centres are also meeting places that answer the citizens’ needs at a time when human and social relations are often difficult. May the Lord help and bless this project of the Diocese of Rome.
3. Let us turn our gaze to Mary, "the woman who was docile to the voice of the Spirit, a woman of silence and attentiveness, a woman of hope" (Tertio millennio adveniente, n. 48). Yesterday we began the "novena" for the Solemnity of the Immaculate Conception: let us entrust to her the path of Christian unity, Rome’s City Mission and the new liturgical year.
After praying the Angelus on Sunday the Holy Father appealed for the release of kidnapped Bishop José de Jesús Quintero Díaz, Prelate of Tibú, Colombia.
I have followed with concern the news of the kidnapping of Bishop José de Jesús Quintero Díaz, Prelate of Tibú, a man of the Church who loves and promotes peace. Today I am close to my Brother in the Episcopate and to the other persons kidnapped, and I am with them at this difficult time in my affection and prayers.
As I deplore this act which violates the most basic human rights, I ask his kidnappers to release this Pastor of the Church so that he can continue to carry out his ministry for the sake of God’s People. I also ardently long for an end to the scourge of kidnappings which threaten Colombian society, so that this beloved country may find ways of harmony and social peace.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS - FEAST OF CHRIST THE KING
Sunday, 23 November  1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. This Sunday, the last of the liturgical year, we are celebrating Christ the King of the universe: he appears as the King of history and creation, of time and eternity.
Today ends the first year of the three-year period of immediate preparation for the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000, a three-year period marked by the itinerary "through Christ — in the Spirit — to the Father". During this first year, 1997, we focused our attention on Jesus Christ, our only Saviour. The year about to begin is the second year and will be dedicated in a special way to the Holy Spirit. Next Sunday, the First Sunday of Advent, I will have the joy of solemnly opening, with a Eucharistic celebration in St Peter's Basilica, this further step towards the Holy Door of the third millennium.
2. At the end of one liturgical year and the beginning of another, we are invited to become more aware of the role of the liturgy in the Church’s life. It marks her progress in time, constantly nourishing her faith, hope and love. In this regard, I am pleased to recall that precisely 50 years ago, on 20 November 1947, Pope Pius XII published the Encyclical Mediator Dei, a true milestone in the history of the Catholic liturgical reform.
With admirable balance and pastoral foresight, it makes the most of the innovative suggestions of the liturgical movement, moderates excesses and describes the Church’s public worship with profound theological and spiritual insight, distinguishing what is unchangeable in it from what is subject to change and modification; the active and personal participation of the faithful is also encouraged. The Second Vatican Council, in the Constitution on the Liturgy and its other documents, amply cites Mediator Dei and completes its doctrinal and pastoral plan, which, to be fully implemented, must be better and better assimilated by the entire People of God.
3. I give thanks to God with you for this significant intervention by my venerable Predecessor, which still retains its importance and timeliness today. May authentic liturgical renewal further the work of the new evangelization. Therefore, let us invoke the intercession of the Blessed Mother of God so that, "inseparably linked with her Son’s saving work" (Sacrosanctum Concilium, n. 103), she may always accompany the Church's journey through time. To her we gratefully entrust the liturgical year which is ending and the next one now on our doorstep. May her example help us live the passing days, weeks and years in openness and docility to the action of divine grace, in order to take part at last in the eternal liturgy of heaven.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
National Migration Day
Sunday, 16 November  1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The solemn Eucharistic concelebration in St Peter’s Basilica for the opening of the Special Assembly for America of the Synod of Bishops has just ended. It was the first Pan-American Synod to take place in history, just over 500 years since the beginning of the evangelization of the "New World". The Synod Fathers who came to Rome for this event are called to examine closely the multifaceted reality of America. Indeed, the Church, treasuring the experience of five centuries of evangelization, intends to prepare herself to meet the great challenges of the third millennium. The objective is to spread the Gospel message ever further so that Christ may be known and welcomed everywhere as man’s true Redeemer.
Our attention has remained particularly focused on Christ during this first year of immediate preparation for the Jubilee of the Year 2000. It is he who tears down the walls that separate individual from individual, nation from nation. Although Christians love and honour their own country, they are men and women "without borders", because the ecclesial community knows no boundaries of race, language or culture.
2. A pressing invitaton to meditate on this reality comes to us today from the Church in Italy, on the occasion of the National Migration Day, whose theme is: "With Christ, for a world without borders". This year, which is also the European year against racism, everyone is committed to a reconciled humanity, with respect for differences and openness to mutual knowledge.
I express my appreciation and encouragement for the many initiatives of solidarity with migrants and refugees, especially with all those — and unfortunately they are many — who are in difficult or precarious situations. I entrust this day’s intentions to the intercession of John Baptist Scalabrini, Bishop and Father of migrants, whom I proclaimed blessed last Sunday.
3. May Mary strengthen by her intercession the commitments that will result from this National Migration Day and from the Synod Assembly for America.
My thoughts turn particularly to the American continent, strewn with shrines where the People of God venerate the Blessed Virgin. May the heavenly Queen of America obtain an abundant outpouring of the Holy Spirit to enlighten the discernment and guide the work and decisions of the Synod.
After the recitation of the Angelus the Holy Father invited those present to remember cloistered religious, for whom the Church prays each year on 21 November, the feast of Mary’s presentation in the temple.
Friday next, the feast of the Presentation of Mary in the Temple, is the annual "Pro Orantibus" Day, a day for cloistered women religious who are especially dedicated to prayer, in silence and recollection. I invite everyone especially to remember these sisters of ours who — as St Thérèse of Lisieux wrote —choose to abide in the "heart" of the Church and need spiritual and material solidarity.
I address a cordial greeting to the pilgrims present in Rome today, and I wish everyone a pleasant Sunday and a good week.
* * *
After praying the Angelus the Holy Father appealed for dialogue and diplomacy to prevent the possible outbreak of hostilities in the Gulf region.
The fate of our brothers and sisters in the Gulf region is a source of deep and renewed concern.
At this moment of extreme tension, when it seems that the possibility of a new armed conflict in Iraq cannot be excluded, I would like to raise a heartfelt appeal that the way of dialogue and diplomacy not be abandoned, in order to preserve and to reinforce respect for justice and international law.
I especially call to mind the civilian populations, particularly the children and the sick, who are unwillingly trapped in a spiral of violence which will make their already difficult situation even more tragic.
Let us implore the Lord to enlighten the minds and hearts of all who are responsible for the destiny of peoples, so that they will realize that peace is the only way to guarantee justice.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 9 November 1997
  1. Before reciting the Angelus, I wish cordially to greet you, dear brothers and sisters, who have come to take part in this solemn Eucharistic liturgy.
First I greet the Hungarian pilgrims, who rejoice today at the beatification of their compatriot, Vilmos Apor. Dear friends, learn to treasure the example of the new blessed, in order to instil the values of the Christian faith in every project of authentic moral and civil progress at the service of your noble nation.
Next I greet the faithful from the Dioceses of Como and Piacenza, the missionaries belonging to the great Scalabrini family, who today give thanks to God, in communion with the whole Church, for the beatification of John Baptist Scalabrini, father of migrants. May his example spur everyone to ever greater concern for and solidarity with our brothers and sisters who are emigrants and refugees.
I now affectionately greet the Mexican Bishops and faithful. The beatification of "Madre Vicentita", as you fondly call her, today gladdens the path of the Church in Mexico and on the whole American continent and, as the model of a nursing sister, she spurs the Gospel commitment of health-care workers in view of the third millennium.
2. Today, Sunday, 9 November, the Church in Italy is celebrating the 47th National Thanksgiving Day, established at the initiative of the National Federation of Italian Farmers. It is an excellent occasion to acknowledge God’s gifts and to show the Lord our gratitude.
At the end of this second millennium, there is an urgent need to lift our gaze on high, to the Giver of all good gifts, to recognize that everything comes from his providential and merciful love. But we cannot thank God without committing ourselves to working as Christians to spread in all social strata respect for and solidarity with our brothers and sisters, especially the most needy and defenceless. The new blesseds offer a most eloquent and encouraging example of this.
Thanksgiving Day is a great occasion for our communities to reflect on a renewed proclamation of the Church’s "social Gospel" and on the full utilization of work and of every human effort which serves the plan of God, our Creator and Redeemer.
3. We entrust these sentiments and wishes to Mary, through the three new blesseds. May the Blessed Virgin, Mother of the Church and Queen of All Saints, take us under her mantle and guide us on our path of life and Christian witness.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS - ALL SOULS DAY
Sunday, 2 November 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Yesterday we celebrated the Solemnity of All Saints and today the liturgy invites us to commemorate the faithful departed. The Church links her contemplation of those who have already attained God’s glory with her remembrance of those who have gone before us marked with the sign of faith and who now sleep in peace (cf. Roman Canon).
I spiritually join all who in these days are visiting the graves of their departed ones in the cemeteries of Rome and the whole world. I go on spiritual pilgrimage especially to where the victims of violence and war, of injustice and hunger are buried. May Jesus, who said: "I am the resurrection and the life" (Jn 11:25), grant to all the departed the rest of the just and the fullness of eternal life.
2. The Church’s tradition has always recommended prayers for the dead. The basis for this prayer of suffrage is found in the communion of the Mystical Body. As the Second Vatican Council stresses: "In full consciousness of this communion of the whole Mystical Body of Jesus Christ, the Church in her pilgrim members, from the very earliest days of the Christian religion, has honoured with great respect the memory of the dead" (Lumen gentium, n. 50).
Therefore she encourages cemetery visits, the care of graves and prayers of suffrage as a witness of confident hope, amid the sorrow of being separated from one’s loved ones. Death is not the last word on human fate, because man is destined for endless life, which finds its fulfilment in God.
For this reason, the Council emphasizes: "Faith, with its solidly based teaching, provides every thoughtful man with an answer to his anxious queries about his future lot. At the same time it makes him able to be united in Christ with his loved ones who have already died, and gives hope that they have found true life in God" (Gaudium et spes, n. 18).
3. With this belief in man’s ultimate destiny, we now turn to Mary, who experienced the drama of Christ’s death at the foot of the Cross and then shared in the joy of his Resurrection. May she, the Gate of Heaven, help us more and more to understand the value of praying for our departed loved ones. May she sustain us each day on our earthly pilgrimage and help us never to lose sight of the ultimate goal of life, which is paradise.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS - ALL SAINTS DAY
Saturday, 1 November 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. For the Christian people the first two days of November are an intense time of faith and prayer, which puts special emphasis on the "eschatological" dimension forcefully recalled by the Second Vatican Council (cf. Lumen gentium, ch. 7). In celebrating all the saints and commemorating all the faithful departed, the pilgrim Church on earth lives and expresses in her liturgy the spiritual bond uniting her with the Church in heaven.
Today we honour the saints of every age, as we begin praying for our deceased loved ones and visiting cemeteries. How consoling it is to think that our dearly departed are in the company of Mary, the Apostles, the martyrs, the confessors of the faith, the virgins and all the holy men and women in paradise!
2. Today’s solemnity thus helps us to deepen our understanding of a basic truth of the Christian faith which we profess in the Creed: the "communion of saints". This is how the Second Vatican Coucil expressed it: "All, indeed, who are of Christ and have his Spirit form one Church and in Christ cleave together (Eph 4:16). So it is that the union of the wayfarers with the brethren who sleep in the peace of Christ is in no way interrupted, but on the contrary, according to the constant faith of the Church, this union is reinforced by an exchange of spiritual goods.... By their fraternal concern our weakness is thus greatly helped" (Lumen gentium, n. 49).
This wondrous communion is realized in the most elevated and intense way in the divine liturgy, especially in the Eucharistic sacrifice: here "we are most closely united to the worship of the heavenly Church, when in the fellowship of communion we honour and remember the glorious Ever-Virgin Mary, St Joseph, the holy Apostles and martyrs and all the saints" (ibid., n. 50).
3. In the glorious assembly of the saints, God has wished to reserve the first place for the Mother of the Incarnate Word. Down the centuries and for all eternity Mary remains at the summit of the communion of saints, as the unique guardian of the bond between the universal Church and Christ, her Lord. For those who wish to follow Jesus on the way of the Gospel, Mary is a sure and experienced guide, a thoughtful and attentive Mother, to whom every desire and difficulty can be entrusted.
Let us pray together to the Queen of All Saints, that she will help us to respond with generous fidelity to God, who calls us to be holy as he himself is holy (cf. Lv 19:2; Mt 5:48).
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 26 October 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The month of October ìs dedicated to praying the Rosary, a popular prayer par excellence, which belongs to the spiritual heritage of all God’s People.
My Predecessors were very fond of this prayer, which Pius XII of venerable memory described as "a compendium of the whole Gospel" (Letter to the Archbishop of Manila: AAS 38 [1946], 419).
As we approach the end of the first year of immediate preparation for the Jubilee of the Year 2000, which is dedicated to Christ the Saviour, I am pleased to recall what Pope Paul VI wrote in his Apostolic Exhortation Marialis cultus: "As a Gospel prayer centred on the mystery of the redemptive Incarnation, the Rosary is therefore a prayer with a clearly Christological orientation. Its most characteristic element, in fact, the litany-like succession of Hail Mary’s, ... constitutes the warp on which is woven the contemplation of the mysteries ... as seen through the eyes of her who was closest to the Lord" (nn. 46-47: AAS 66 [1974], 155-156).
2. How many times in the course of history has the Church had recourse to this prayer, especially in particularly difficult moments. The Holy Rosary was a privileged means for averting the danger of war and obtaining the gift of peace from God. Did not the Blessed Virgin, when appearing to the three shepherd children in Fátima 80 years ago, ask that the Rosary be recited for the conversion of sinners and for peace in the world?
And how could we do without prayer for peace at the end of a century which has known terrible wars and unfortunately continues to experience violence and conflict? During these years when we are preparing for the third Christian millennium, may Mary’s Rosary help us to implore God for reconciliation and peace for all humanity.
3. But world peace also comes through the peace of families, the basic cells of the great human family. That is why the Church’s special attention is directed to them, as evidenced by the recent world meeting in Rio de Janeiro.
Today I would like once again to propose that all Christian families pray the Rosary, so that they may taste the beauty of pausing together to meditate, with Mary, on the joyful, sorrowful and glorious mysteries of our Redemption, and thus to sanctify the joyful and difficult moments of daily life. Praying together helps the family to be more united, peaceful and faithful to the Gospel.
May Mary, Queen of the Holy Rosary, be every family's teacher and guide in this prayer, which is particularly dear to me.
To the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors the Holy Father said:
I extend a warm greeting to the English-speaking visitors present for this Angelus prayer.
In particular I welcome the group from Värmland in Sweden, accompanied by the Lutheran Bishop of Karlstad. I pray that your visit to Rome will confirm you in your desire to intensify ecumenical understanding and co-operation between all the peoples of Europe.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS - PROCLAMATION OF ST THÉRÈSE
OF THE CHILD JESUS AND THE HOLY FACE
AS A "DOCTOR OF THE CHURCH"
World Mission Sunday
Sunday, 19 October1997
  Today, World Mission Sunday, we turn our attention especially to St Thérèse of the Child Jesus and the Holy Face, whom this morning I had the joy of proclaiming a doctor of the universal Church. She is a model of missionary commitment and the patroness of the missions, although she never left the cloister of the Lisieux Carmel.
It could be said that Thérèse made her own the exceptional missionary vision of Mary most holy, who inspired the first apostolic community with her prayerful presence and perfect charity, so that the dynamism instilled by the Holy Spirit at Pentecost would carry the proclamation of the Gospel to the very ends of the earth.
From early childhood there was a deep bond between St Thérèse of the Child Jesus and Mary. She attributed her miraculous healing at the age of 10 to the unforgettable experience of Mary’s smile, seen on the face of the statue placed in her room (cf. Ms A, 30rº). The "Madonna of the Smile" would also stand in front of the infirmary bed where the saint ended her brief life consumed by illness.
The spirit of filial abandonment to Our Lady, which marked little Thérèse’s whole life, is offered to us today as an example to imitate.
May St Thérèse of the Child Jesus help us to love, follow and imitate the Blessed Virgin, Mother and Queen of All Saints.
The Holy Father then greeted the various groups in their languages.
I greet the Italian-speaking pilgrims who have come to take part in this solemn celebration. In particular, I wish to extend a cordial greeting to the professors and students of the Roman ecclesiastical universities at the start of the new academic year. Dear friends, the "lesson" that little Thérèse offers the Christian people is particularly significant for you: indeed, all who are called to contemplate and transmit the truths of the faith must cultivate that deep intimacy with God which belongs to the "little" and the "humble". Treasure this teaching!
I warmly greet the French-speaking pilgrims, especially those from the Lisieux region where St Thérèse of the Child Jesus lived. Her spiritual figure and message have inspired many institutes involved in proclaiming the Gospel, particularly the Mission de France founded in 1941 by Cardinal Suhard, who started many missionary activities among the poor and in the scientific world. May everyone take the new doctor of the Church as a model of spiritual life and apostolic courage!
I welcome the English-speaking pilgrims who are here to honour St Thérèse, patroness of the missions and now a doctor of the Church. I commend to you her example of a life dedicated to the love of God, which she expressed in contemplative prayer, in community life and in her concern for the spread of the Gospel to the ends of the earth. Through the intercession of St Thérèse, may God grant you and your families every grace and blessing.
I cordially greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims attending this celebration in which St Thérèse of the Child Jesus was proclaimed a doctor of the Church. May the Virgin Mary help us to see ourselves as the beloved children of God and to come before him with the simplicity and trust that the new doctor of the Church taught us in her spiritual way. My heartfelt blessing to all.
Lastly, I greet all the Carmelites present here and throughout the world.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 12 October 1997
  1. At the end of this solemn Eucharistic celebration, I affectionately greet you all, dear pilgrims who have gathered in Rome from Italy, Europe and America.
I am thinking in particular of the faithful of the Diocese of Brescia, of those of the diocesan community of Tursi-Lagonegro and of the Archdiocese of Spoleto and Norcia, so many of whom have come here despite the serious problems of the earthquake. I urge everyone to follow in the footsteps of the new blesseds and to treasure their teachings, becoming, after their example, witnesses of God’s merciful love in our time.
2. I greet the French-speaking pilgrims who have taken part in today’s beatification, in particular the religious of the Society of Mary Reparatrix. May they take example from Blessed Mary of Jesus, who was able to say yes to the Lord, and may they put themselves at the service of their brothers and sisters, like the Mother of Christ.
I affectionately greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims, and most especially the Bishops and faithful who have come from Mexico for the beatification of Fr Elías de Socorro Nieves, as well as the members of the Augustinian family, who have had the opportunity today to see two illustrious children of theirs raised to the glory of the altars. May the Virgin Mary, Queen of martyrs and virgins help you to imitate their example. I cordially bless you all.
3. Together with the new blesseds, let us now turn our minds to the Blessed Virgin, Queen of all saints. Devotion to Mary shines out eloquently in these brothers and sisters, raised to the glory of the altars. They loved and venerated Our Lady with childlike affection. They turned to her throughout their lives, and especially in times of difficulty and trial, entrusting themselves?and their activities to her motherly hands and heart.
May the Blessed Virgin, who in this month of October we honour in a special way with the recitation of the Rosary, help us respond readily and faithfully to the vocation God addresses to each one of us, according to the diversity of gifts and charisms.
The Holy Father then spoke extemporaneously:
And finally, I must recall that last Sunday, one week ago, I was able to celebrate the second great World Meeting with Families in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. I remember everyone and I am grateful for the Brazilians' great hospitality and especially that of the Cardinal of Rio de Janeiro, who welcomed families from all over the world during those days. May Mary, Mother of Families, bless all the families of Brazil and of the world.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
APOSTOLIC JOURNEY
OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL II
TO RIO DE JANEIRO, ON THE OCCASION OF THE
2nd WORLD MEETING FOR FAMILIES
(OCTOBER 2-6, 1997)
ANGELUS
Aterro do Flamengo
5 October 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
With great affection I greet the families gathered here and those of all Brazil who are listening to me on radio or television. May today's Meeting instil hope for the future of the Christian family. You have the leading role in your country's destiny. May God bless you and go with you!
I also greet the Spanish-speaking families present here and those in Spain and Latin America who are spiritually joining in this celebration. May the Virgin Mary help you keep the flame of faith, love and harmony alive in every home, to be the light and hope of humanity! Be faithful to the vocation to which God has called you. I bless you all affectionately.
I warmly greet all the English-speaking families from around the world. The family remains a primary and most important concern of the Church's life and ministry. As the family goes, so goes the Church, and so goes human society as a whole. May this World Meeting of Families lead to a new awareness of the value of the family in God's eyes, and make Catholic families more gratefully aware of their role as the "domestic church". Only when parents pray with their children can they truly transmit the truths and values of the faith. May the Holy Family of Nazareth be your model and guide. God bless you all!
I cordially greet the Polish families in their homeland and abroad. I greet Polish families in Brazil in particular. I constantly pray to God that the sanctification of families in Christ may be achieved. Today I come with you before God the Father with this fervent prayer, that he will bless what he has accomplished in you through the sacrament of marriage, for in God himself is the source of life and holiness. May the holiness of families become the leaven of interior renewal for individuals and nations! God bless you!
French-speaking families, I greet you wholeheartedly, those here in Rio and those in your own country who are in communion with us. Give thanks for God's gifts, for your love and for your children. In hope, with the help of the Mother of the Lord, be faithful to your commitments for the good of humanity and the Church! God bless you!
I affectionately greet the Italian families present here and those who are spiritually united with us in Brazil, Italy and the whole world. Dear families, be ever aware of the lofty mission that God entrusts to you, and use every possible means to build the civilization of love and life. May the Lord bless you and go with you!
I express my joy over this meeting with families here in Rio de Janeiro, which had such great and enthusiastic participation. I thank everyone who contributed to the success of this event. I hope that these days in Rio will leave in everyone's heart a serious commitment to defending the family, the hope of humanity. During the celebration of the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000 in Rome, there will have to be a special meeting with families. All families are invited.
And now we raise our thoughts to the Holy Family of Nazareth, asking for their protection and help so that by their example and inspiration, Christian homes may be a place of peace and serenity, the fruit of a real, living faith.
In a special way during the recitation of the Angelus our prayers are now addressed to the Blessed Virgin, cause of our joy.
In her the Word was made flesh and dwelt amongst us; in her we receive the pledge of eternal life. Let us joyfully acclaim the beginning of our salvation.
At the end of Mass the Holy Father spoke a few words extemporaneously:
From the top of Corcovado Christ blesses the city of Rio de Janeiro and Brazil. Especially today may Christ bless all Brazilian families and all the families of the world. May they keep this blessing of the Christ of Corcovado and remain in Christ's embrace for their whole life! Thank you!
 
PASTORAL VISIT
OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL II
TO BOLOGNA, ON THE OCCASION OF THE
23rd ITALIAN NATIONAL EUCHARISTIC CONGRESS
(SEPTEMBER 27-28, 1997)
ANGELUS
Sunday, 28 September 1997
  1. "Ave, verum corpus, natum de Maria Virgine", "Hail, true Body, born of the Virgin Mary".
At the end of this solemn Eucharistic celebration, which has seen the whole Italian Church spiritually gathered around the Sacrament of the Altar, we turn our thoughts to the Virgin Mother of the Incarnate Word, who made himself the food and drink of our salvation.
As we meditate on the sublime mystery of the Body and Blood of Christ, we would like to greet Mary, in whose womb the eternal Son of God became man. We recall this central reality of our faith every time we recite the Marian prayer of the Angelus: "Verbum caro factum est et habitavit in nobis", "The Word was made flesh and dwelt among us". Filled with spiritual gratitude, we call upon the Holy Mother of the Saviour, sanctuary of the divine presence and tabernacle of eternal glory.
2. In the city of Bologna, where this Eucharistic Congress, which is now drawing to a close, was held, the Blessed Virgin is especially venerated under the title of the "Madonna of St Luke". The devotion of the Bolognese to their heavenly patroness is ancient and profound; it is part of their civic and cultural identity and is represented visibly as it were by the majestic portico that joins the city and the Shrine of Monte della Guardia.
In the past, Our Lady was the defence and glory of the inhabitants of Bologna and its surrounding region in the various joyful or sad circumstances of their history. Today she continues to help and protect her children in all their material and spiritual needs.
3. Let us now entrust the fruits of the National Eucharistic Congress to the Blessed Virgin.
With your motherly protection, O Mary, watch over the future course of the beloved community of Bologna and the entire Church in Italy.
Help us all to continue courageously and generously in our commitment to the new evangelization, so that on the threshold of the new millennium we may be authentic witnesses to the infinite riches of God’s love, revealed and communicated to the world in the sacrament of the Eucharist.
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 21 September 1997
    Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The world meeting of the Pope with families, scheduled to take place in Rio de Janeiro during the first few days of next month, is approaching. Today too, my reflection is focused on this important event over which, God willing, I will have the joy to preside. For this meeting it is important that Christian communities, and especially families, come prepared and aware.
I have learned with deep satisfaction that representatives of associations and movements for the family and for life will be coming to Rio de Janeiro from all parts of the world. Together they will bear great witness, which will take on the positive significance of a challenge. They will tell the world that by drawing inspiration for one’s life from the Gospel, it is possible to live a faithful, responsible and generous love; they will say that the family is the natural cradle where it is possible to welcome human life joyfully and to love, protect and educate it.
Dear families! Be the salt of the earth and the light of the world! (cf. Mt 5:13, 14). Today more than ever it is your impelling duty to proclaim the beauty and greatness of authentic love by your way of life itself. By drawing on the mystery of the love of Christ and the Church in the sacrament of marriage, make the Gospel light, in which lies the world’s salvation, shine forth in yourselves.
2. Yesterday afternoon the 23rd National Eucharistic Congress began in Bologna and will be solemnly concluded next Sunday. The Congress’ theme —"Jesus Christ, the one Saviour of the world, yesterday, today and for ever" —closely links this extraordinary spiritual event with the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000, of which it is an important stage. In a certain way, it ends the first year of immediate preparation for the Jubilee event, dedicated to reflection on Jesus.
Please God, I will have the joy of personally taking part in the closing celebrations of the Congress on Saturday and Sunday next. Now, however, I would like to invite all believers to unite themselves spiritually in prayer with this meeting of faith, a powerful ecclesial experience, which sees the whole Church in Italy united around the Eucharistic Jesus to adore him and to draw renewed strength from him in the daily task of serving the Gospel.
3. Let us entrust our prayers to the intercession of Mary most holy, Mother of the Incarnate Word and Queen of the Family. May she implore her divine Son for the successful outcome of these important ecclesial events.
To the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors the Holy Father said:
I gladly greet the English-speaking visitors who have joined us for this Marian prayer. Only when families draw close to God in prayer can they be schools of faith and Christian life. As a way of sharing in the forthcoming World Day of the Family, I recommend an increase of family prayer, especially the family Rosary. Upon all of you I invoke the joy and peace of our Lord Jesus Christ.
* * *
After praying the Angelus the Holy Father said:
"A race against time" is the theme of today’s World Alzheimer's Day, meant to inform public opinion about this insidious illness which afflicts millions of people throughout the world. I express my appreciation of the Day’s noble aims, and promise a special remembrance in prayer for those stricken with this disease and for their relatives. I also pray for the associations committed to supporting them, for the health-care workers and researchers, and I encourage everyone to persevere in this important work of solidarity, paying special attention to the situations of greatest distress and abandonment.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
 JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 14 September 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. We can now see on the horizon an important ecclesial event: the Pope’s Second World Meeting with Families, which will take place in Brazil, in Rio de Janeiro, from 2 to 5 October next.
During these months many family assemblies have been held in various parts of the world and they have offered an opportunity for reflection and prayer in view of this new meeting. The Archdiocese of Rio de Janeiro and the Bishops’ Conference of Brazil are carefully and enthusiastically preparing it, with the help of the Pontifical Council for the Family. Active interest in the great cause of the family must be reinforced, for it is through the family that the future of humanity and of the new evangelization passes (cf. Familiaris consortio, n. 86).
The theme is one of the key points in the teaching of the Second Vatican Council. In the Pastoral Constitution Gaudium et spes we read: "The wellbeing of the individual person and of both human and Christian society is closely bound up with the healthy state of conjugal and family life" (n. 47). This is the conviction of the Church and of those peoples who recognize the family based on marriage as the inalienable patrimony of humanity. Indeed, the spiritual and cultural identity of families constitutes the basis of the identity of the nation to which they belong.
2. It is precisely this fundamental truth that the meeting's theme is meant to emphasize: "The family: gift and commitment, hope of humanity". It highlights the central role of the family as the primordial cell of society and the sanctuary of life. To renew itself and face the demands of the time, the family asks to be recognized by society and to have its rights respected and supported.
Another statement of the Council comes to mind: "The future of humanity is in the hands of those who are capable of providing the generations to come with reasons for life and hope" (Gaudium et spes, n. 31). There are many in the world, both men and women, who communicate these reasons by their witness. I appeal to political leaders and lawmakers to ensure that institutions give the utmost support to this fundamental role of the family. I also hope that the media of social communications will make a positive effort, with respect and a sense of responsibility, to promote reflection and dialogue on the family and its problems.
3. May the World Meeting in Rio de Janeiro lead to a great mobilization of consciences so that humanity will orient itself and advance according to the order God has impressed upon creation. I invite Christian families throughout the world to collaborate in this great cause, and I deeply hope that they can draw new energy from the meeting in Rio de Janiero for their apostolic commitment.
Let us pray to the Queen of Families to bless our efforts and bring them to completion.
After reciting the Angelus the Holy Father greeted the English-speaking visitors and made a special appeal for the success of the forthcoming peace talks in Northern Ireland. Here is the text of his remarks.
I extend a warm greeting to the English-speaking visitors present at this Angelus prayer. My thoughts turn with hope to the important talks due to be held this week in Northern Ireland. People of every sector of society there have shown an earnest and sincere desire for a peaceful solution to the long-standing conflict. I invite you to pray that God will guide those involved in these meetings in the difficult but essential task of finding an agreement on the way forward.
Upon you and your families I invoke the grace and peace of our Lord Jesus Christ.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 7 September 1997
  1. At this time of prayer I am pleased to recall our very dear sister, Mother Teresa of Calcutta, who two days ago ended her long earthly journey. I had the opportunity to meet her many times and I have a vivid memory of her diminutive figure, bent over by a life spent in service to the poorest of the poor, but always filled with inexhaustible interior energy: the energy of Christ’s love.
Missionary of Charity: this is what Mother Teresa was in name and in fact, offering such an appealing example that she attracted to herself many people who were ready to leave everything to follow Christ present in the poor.
Missionary of Charity. Her mission began everyday, before dawn, in the presence of the Eucharist. In the silence of contemplation, Mother Teresa of Calcutta heard the echo of Jesus’ cry on the cross: "I thirst". This cry, received in the depths of her heart, spurred her to seek out Jesus in the poor, the abandoned and the dying on the streets of Calcutta and to all the ends of the earth.
2. Dear brothers and sisters, this sister, universally known as the Mother of the poor, leaves an eloquent example for everyone, believer and non-believer. She leaves us the witness of God's love, which she accepted and which transformed her life into a total gift to her brothers and sisters. She leaves us the witness of contemplation which becomes love, of love which becomes contemplation. The works she accomplished speak for themselves and show the people of our time that lofty meaning of life which unfortunately seems often to be lost.
She loved to say again and again: "To serve the poor in order to serve life". Mother Teresa never missed an opportunity to stress in every way love for life. She knew by experience that life acquires all its value, even amid difficulties and contradictions, when it encounters love. And by following the Gospel, she became a "good Samaritan" to everyone she met, to every life in crisis, suffering and scorned.
3. In Mother Teresa’s great heart a special place was reserved for the family. "A family that prays", she said at the first World Meeting of Families, "is a happy family". Today the words of this unforgettable Mother of the poor are as powerful as ever. "In the family we are loved as God loves: it is a love of sharing. In the family one experiences the joy of loving and being loved by one another. In the family one must learn to pray together. The fruit of prayer is faith; the fruit of faith is love; the fruit of love is service; and the fruit of service is peace" (cf. L’Osservatore Romano, 9 October 1994, p. 4). How could we fail to accept this invitation to base the authentic well-being and true happiness of the family on the solid foundation of prayer, love and mutual service? May these reflections of hers be a useful contribution to the preparation of the Pope’s second meeting with families, which will be held in Rio de Janeiro from 2 to 5 October next.
As I entrust the generous soul of this humble and faithful religious to the Lord, let us ask the Blessed Virgin to support and comfort the sisters of her community and everyone throughout the world who knew and loved her.
After reciting the Angelus and imparting his Blessing, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims in their various languages. To the English-speaking he said:
I cordially greet the English-speaking visitors. May the Blessed Virgin Mary, the perfect model of Christian life, teach us all to be faithful disciples of Jesus her divine Son. I invite you to continue to pray for true peace in all those parts of the world where people are suffering the consequences of violence and conflict, especially in the Holy Land. God bless you and our families!
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 31 August 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. At the 12th World Youth Day in Paris I was able to experience first-hand the vitality of the "young" Church with its intense enthusiasm and love for Jesus. Young people will be the witnesses and messengers of the Gospel in the third millennium. They will have the leading role in the great task of building that civilization of love to which the human heart aspires.
To fulfil this demanding task, however, they need to be trained, encouraged and guided. They particularly need the constant support of the family, of an authentically Christian family. Here my thoughts turn to another important world event thematically linked with the World Youth Day. I mean the second international meeting of the Pope with families. This meeting will take place in Rio de Janeiro from 2 to 5 October next and will have the theme: "The family, gift and commitment, hope of humanity".
At the next few Sunday gatherings for the recitation of the Angelus, we will have the opportunity to reflect together on the importance of this world meeting, which will forcefully emphasize that the family is the first and fundamental way of the Church. The future of humanity and of the People of God themselves comes through the defence and full development of the family.
2. My thoughts now turn to tormented Algeria, where there are continual reports of unprecedented violence relentlessly striking many innocent people. Appalled at this cruel savagery, I entrust the many victims to God’s mercy, imploring the Lord to comfort their grief-stricken relatives. May God touch the hearts of those involved in these slaughters so that such an unjustifiable spiral of violence will end and the country can return to the peace for which it longs.
I am also anxious about the Holy Land, where, after the terrible attacks occurring on 30 July last in Jerusalem, we have more and more disturbing information, further saddened by the very grave situation existing particularly in Bethlehem, with consequences also for the many pilgrims. I have learned that decisions have been taken which should lessen or eliminate these difficulties: I firmly hope that they will be the first step towards a process of normalization, which becomes more imperative each day.
For this I pray and invite everyone to pray. Indeed, there is great apprehension because of the sharp tension that remains and the enormous difficulties which the people of Bethlehem and all the Palestinian territories are forced to deal with on a daily basis.
3. Dear brothers and sisters, let us turn with confidence to the Lord so that he will inspire and strengthen those in positions of responsibility, helping them to promote justice, security and peace together and concretely, while avoiding provocations and attitudes that offend the dignity, rights and legitimate aspirations of every person.
Let us gather these intentions and entrust them to the Blessed Virgin, so that she may protect and enlighten families, nations shaken by violence and all humanity.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father addressed the pilgrims in their various languages. To the English-speaking he said:
I am pleased to greet the English-speaking pilgrims who have joined us for this Angelus prayer. In particular I welcome the new seminarians of the Pontifical North American College: the fact that you are preparing for the priesthood in the city of Rome is a grace and a responsibility. May you be filled with love for the Church of Christ and become ardent preachers of the Gospel.
The joy and peace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all!
In front of the papal residence at Castel Gandolfo were a group of collectors of FIAT 500 cars, who were celebrating the 40th anniversary of the launching of this model. The Holy Father said to them in Italian:
I am pleased to greet and bless those in the square with FIAT 500 cars, now a period auto, on the occasion of the 40th anniversary of the launching of this well-known and delightful model.
As I thank the organizers for their courteous visit, I take the opportunity to urge drivers to have a sense of responsibility on the road, especially in these days when people are returning from their holidays.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
APOSTOLIC JOURNEY
OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL II
TO PARIS, ON THE OCCASION OF THE
12th WORLD YOUTH DAY
(AUGUST 21-24, 1997)
ANGELUS
Longchamp Racecourse
Sunday, 24 August 1997
  1. At the close of this World Youth Day in France, I wish to recall the great figure of Saint Theresa of Lisieux, whose birth took place one hundred years ago.
This young Carmelite was entirely captivated by the love of God. She lived the radical offering of herself in response to that love. In the simplicity of daily life she also knew how to practise fraternal love. Imitating Jesus, she willingly sat at the table of sinners, her brothers and sisters, so that they might be purified by love, for she was animated by an ardent desire to see everyone "enlightened by the luminous torch of faith" (cf. Ms C, 6 rº).
Theresa was familiar with physical suffering and the testing of faith. But she remained faithful because in her great spiritual understanding she knew that God was just and merciful; she perceived that love is more something received from God than something given by man. In the depths of darkness, she placed her hope in Jesus, the suffering Servant who gave his life for many (cf. Is 53:12).
2. Theresa always had the Book of the Gospels at hand (cf. Letter 193). She penetrated its message with an extraordinary certainty of judgement. She understood that in the life of God, Father, Son, and Spirit, "love and faithfulness meet" (Ps 85:10). In a few years, she ran "a giant's course" (Ms A, 44 vº). She discovered that her vocation was to be love itself in the heart of the Church. Humble and poor, Theresa shows the "little way" of children who confide in the Father with "bold trust". The heart of her message, her spiritual attitude, is for all the faithful.
Theresa's teaching, a true science of love, is the luminous expression of her knowledge of the mystery of Christ and of her personal experience of grace; she helps the men and women of today, and she will help those of tomorrow, to be more aware of the gifts of God and to spread the Good News of his infinite love.
3. Carmelite and apostle, mistress of spiritual wisdom for many consecrated persons and lay people, patroness of the missions, Saint Theresa has a privileged place in the Church. Her eminent teaching deserves to be considered among the most fruitful.
In response to many requests, and after attentive study, I have the joy to announce that on Mission Sunday, October 19, 1997, in Saint Peter's Basilica in Rome, I will proclaim Saint Theresa of the Child Jesus and the Holy Face a Doctor of the Church.
I have wished solemnly to announce solemnly this event here, because the message of Saint Theresa, a holy young woman so present to our times, is of particular interest to you, young people. In the school of the Gospel she indicates to you the path of Christian maturity. She calls you to an infinite generosity; she invites you remain in the heart of the Church as disciples and ardent witnesses of Christ's charity.
Let us invoke Saint Theresa so that she will lead the men and women of our times on the path of Truth and Life!
With Theresa let us turn to the Virgin Mary, whom she honoured and to whom she prayed with filial confidence throughout her life.
Angelus Domini . . .
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 17 August 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Tomorrow the 12th World Youth Day, an important stage in the Church’s journey towards the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000, opens in Paris. We have prepared for this important event with prayer, and on previous Sundays we have reflected together on several topics regarding the forthcoming international youth meeting.
I would now like to speak particularly to the young people who will be taking part in this intense week of spiritual communion and of festive, joyous celebration.
2. Dear young people, this extraordinary event gives you the opportunity to have a first-hand experience of the Church’s catholicity. In the French capital, young men and women who come from various nations in the world will meet. And spiritually united with them will be all those who, though far away on the various continents, will be present in Paris in mind and heart.
It is the Church of young people that is meeting! My warmest wish is that the enthusiasm typical of your age may help all God’s People become aware of the very lofty vocation to which Jesus is calling them. May your example be a special encouragement to your peers who are searching for genuine meaning in their lives.
3. "Go into all the world!" (Mk 16:15). The risen Christ’s invitation to his disciples also applies to you, called to be Christ’s apostles in our time. Your stay in Paris will be an occasion for great ecclesial and missionary commitment. With its moments of dialogue and reflection, with its liturgical celebrations and pauses for meditation, it will help you experience in a new way the presence and action of the Spirit, "who acts within the Church both in the sacraments, especially in Confirmation, and in the variety of charisms, roles and ministries which he inspires for the good of the Church" (Tertio millennio adveniente, n. 45).
Confirmed in faith and conscious of the outpouring of the Holy Spirit received in the sacraments of Baptism and Confirmation, you will return to your countries of origin with renewed zeal. You will be messengers of hope, witnesses of the Lord’s merciful love.
May Mary, sanctuary of the Holy Spirit, who persevered in prayer with the Apostles in the Upper Room, guide and protect the forthcoming World Youth Day.
To the English-speaking visitors and pilgrims the Holy Father said:
I extend a warm welcome to the English-speaking visitors present here in Castel Gandolfo for the Angelus prayer. My special greeting goes to the Padre Pio Prayer Group from Dublin. May the example of holiness of the Blessed Virgin Mary inspire you to seek an ever deeper personal relationship with God, the source of all light and happiness. Next Sunday we will recite this Marian prayer in Paris at the World Youth Day. Some of you will be there. I ask all of you to support that great occasion with your prayers. May God bless you all!
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS - FEAST OF THE ASSUMPTION OF MARY
Friday, 15 August 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today the liturgy celebrates the Solemnity of the Blessed Virgin’s Assumption body and soul into heaven. Thus she is contemplated by the Church, called on this day to exult with intense joy, recognizing in the Woman clothed with the sun and radiant with light, a sign of sure and consoling hope. What fullness of happiness and glory is foretold to believers in today’s mystery of the Assumption!
Mary most holy shows us the final outcome for those "who hear the word of God and keep it!" (Lk 11:28). She urges us not to dwell on the troubles of the moment, but to lift up our gaze and let it sweep the boundless, peaceful horizons where Christ sits at the right hand of the Father: and where she too, the humble handmaid of Nazareth, is now in heavenly glory.
Modern man, restless and perplexed by the recurring question of the riddle of death, particularly needs this joyous hope, this ever new message.
2. In Mary and in the mystery of her Assumption, every person is called to discover the bold, connatural end of life, according to the plan established by the Creator: in other words, to be conformed to Christ, the incarnate Word, authentic image of the heavenly Father, to join him on the journey of faith and to rise with him to the fullness of blessed life.
In this vision, the Solemnity of the Assumption is a providential encouragement to meditate on the very lofty dignity of every human being, even in his bodily dimension. This reflection fits in well with preparations for the World Youth Day, which is now close at hand. Especially to young people, the hope of a new world at the dawn of the third Christian millennium, I would like to address the Apostle’s exhortation, "to present your bodies as a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God", not to be conformed to the mentality of this age (cf. Rom 12:1-2).
Jesus, the Teacher of immortality, calls us to follow him with purity of life and genuine love.
3. Dear young people, whom, God willing, I hope to meet in Paris in a few days’ time, look to Mary, tota pulchra, undefiled in body and soul. Let yourselves be guided by her, so that your hearts, open to the truth and attracted by the beauty of creation, may radiate significant acts of acceptance and generous dedication to your brothers and sisters.
With Mary, bear witness to a love that goes beyond the confines of earthly life. Walk with her, day after day, sustained by the hope of being able one day to join her in the eternal happiness of paradise.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father said to the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors:
I cordially greet the English-speaking visitors gathered with us for the Angelus prayer, especially the pilgrims from Taiwan and Israel. Today we honour the Blessed Virgin Mary who, assumed body and soul into heaven, has already reached the fullness of the salvation brought by her Son. Through her life and holiness, Mary too had a unique part in the mystery of Redemption. May you always feel her maternal presence, and trust in her powerful intercession. God bless you and your families!
© Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 10 August 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. We are continuing our spiritual journey towards World Youth Day, which will be held in Paris from 18 to 24 August. As I have already had the opportunity to say, it will be an extraordinary and providential event for all the world’s young people in this period of immediate preparation for the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000.
In fact, the Paris meeting, where young men and women of every continent, race and culture will converge, offers as it were the image of the Church of the third millennium and of future humanity itself. Young people, the hope and future of the world and of the Christian community, are called to take the lead in these times when the foundations are being laid for a society marked by more intense solidarity and more open fraternal sharing. But how can we build a humanity that is reconciled and profoundly renewed unless it is based on the Gospel?
2. "Teacher, where are you staying? ... Come and see" (Jn 1:38-39). The theme of the 12th World Youth Day is an explicit and pressing invitation to turn our gaze to the Lord, to seek him in every way and to follow him with constant fidelity. Only through Christ can we give life to a world of authentic peace and fruitful reconciliation.
Jesus is the peace that reconciles the human being, individuals and families, nations and peoples. At the time of his Passion he prayed "that they may all be one" (Jn 17:21) and entrusted to his disciples in every age the task of being architects of this supernatural unity and artisans of true and lasting peace.
3. Dear young people, you need peace to build your life! Draw close to Jesus, the Teacher and Lord of that peace no one else in the world can give you. Learning from him, promote the "dialogue of conversion", which is as it were a "completely interior spiritual space in which Christ, by the power of the Spirit, leads them all [the Christian communities], without exception, to examine themselves before the Father and to ask themselves whether they have been faithful to his plan for the Church" (Ut unum sint, n. 82).
May the Holy Spirit, as my venerable Predecessor Paul VI wrote, the anniversary of whose death we commemorated a few days ago, "guide us along the way of reconciliation, so that the unity of our Churches may become an ever more radiant sign of hope and consolation for all mankind" (ibid., n. 99).
For this let us call upon Mary, Mother of unity and Queen of peace.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
I would first of all like to greet the Italian-speaking pilgrims who have come here, especially the "Friends of Manaus" from the Social Centre of the Missionary Sisters of Our Lady of Mt Carmel, coming from Taranto and Sassari. Dear friends, I thank you for your presence and sincerely hope that you can continue your efforts of human and Christian solidarity with constantly renewed energy.
I now address a special word to those taking part in the international charitable cycling marathon, Chernobyl-2000, organized for peace. I greet the promoters and organizers, as well as the athletes and those who in various ways have helped carry out this charitable competition, which highlights the great value of sport when put at the service of solidarity and peace.
May your sporting event bring the peoples of this era a step closer together as we swiftly head towards the third millennium.
With these sentiments, I invoke the blessing of almighty God upon you all.
* * *
To the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors the Holy Father said:
I greet the English-speaking pilgrims who have prayed the Angelus with us. May these summer holidays be a time of spiritual renewal for you all. I commend you and your families to the intercession of the Blessed Virgin Mary and I invoke upon you God’s blessings of joy and peace.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 3 August 1997
Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. I address a cordial greeting to all of you gathered here for the Sunday prayer of the Angelus. In particular, I greet and thank the pilgrims who have come to visit me. I hope that their stay in Rome will be an opportunity to renew their faith in Christ and to acquire a deeper knowledge of the history and life of the Church.
We are preparing for World Youth Day and, on these Sundays, I think with special affection of the young people of the whole world who will take part in the extraordinary meeting scheduled to take place in Paris from 18 to 24 August.
2. Dear young people, I am expecting you in Paris, where it will give me great joy to meet you and share with you in prayer and in reflection our common faith in Christ, source of immortal life. From every corner of the world the Church sees advancing a new generation thirsting for truth, freedom and happiness: dear young people, you long for an interior life and dialogue with Christ. You seek authentic teachers and witnesses to show you the way of truth and love. You sometimes ask yourselves: "Who will teach us to pray? Who will introduce us into the life-giving mystery of the Good News?". Look at all those who have gone before you on the arduous and exciting path of faith and holiness. They will help you share that same witness to faith which has marked their life.
To strive for holiness, to follow Jesus on the demanding way of the Gospel, is a fundamental aspect of every Christian life — as you well know. What is holiness if not entering into a deep relationship with God, Trinity of love, and growing in intimacy with Christ, Son of God incarnate? And does not true self-discipline contribute to strengthening the person's interior being as well as his integral growth?
3. Dear young people, Christ repeats to each one of you: "Get up and walk!". He counts on you, he awaits each one of you. He invites you to become aware of your dignity as persons for whom he shed his blood. He comes to meet you on the path of life; he forgives you and makes you a gift of his joy and his peace.
On this journey of deepening your understanding of the Gospel and of encounter with Christ, the Mother of the Incarnate Word is beside you. Contemplate Mary! Like her, may you be able to say "yes" to the Lord’s call. Ask her to guide you in your daily choices, so that you can fulfil your vocation and live to the full in the freedom of God’s children.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the faithful in various languages. To the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors he said:
I am pleased to greet the English-speaking visitors who have joined us for this Angelus prayer. During these summer holidays may almighty God bless you and your families with joy and peace.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 27 July 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. During these days the World Congress of Catholic Guides is being celebrated in Assisi. This important gathering offers me the welcome opportunity of conveying my cordial greeting to all those who are meeting in the town of Francis and Clare, and to all the world’s young people, in some way anticipating the joy of meeting them in the month of August, on the occasion of the next World Youth Day.
At this moment, I would particularly like to greet, in their own language, the young people from France who are linked with us by radio and television, to encourage them in their commitment to prepare spiritually for this important world day.
2. Dear young people of France, I greet you warmly. I am sure that World Youth Day will be an important time of prayer, fraternal sharing and a true experience of the Church for each one of you.
You have many things to say to the Church; you also have a lot of questions to ask her. The Church wants to listen to you. She wants to enable you to discover the One who is the Way, the Truth and the Life. She wishes to help you achieve your expectations and aspirations, to overcome the difficulties you might be passing through, so that you can develop your talents and that your life may be beautiful. In asking Christ, Master, where are you staying?, you will be able, with the Church, to discover him, the Lord who gives meaning to life and comes to make a covenant with you. Do not be afraid to let yourselves be led to the meeting with Jesus who wants your happiness! By living in the Church, you discover that you are not alone on the way, and that together we live the love of Christ and support each other. During the different meetings in the French Dioceses where you will be received, and when we are all together in Paris, Christ will be present among us and will accompany us; Jesus has told us: “Where two or three are gathered in my name, there am I in the midst of them” (Mt 18:20).
3. Likewise, these days of sharing will give you the opportunity to meet young people from other countries and continents. I invite you to give one another a fraternal welcome, thereby showing the world the rich human and spiritual values you bear. Calling on adults to guide you on your way, you are asking them to transmit the Gospel to you and to be witnesses to the Lord for you. I greet all the Catholics of France, and I thank the Christian communities for welcoming the young people during the month of August.
May Mary, who followed the growth of her Son Jesus with motherly love, watch over the expectations and commitments of the young people of our time, so that with their ideals and enthusiasm they can offer their indispensable contribution to building the civilization of love.
  After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the faithful in various languages. To the English-speaking visitors and pilgrims he said:
I am pleased to welcome the Englishspeaking visitors who have joined us for this Angelus prayer. May these summer holidays be a time of rest and spiritual renewal for you and your families. Upon all of you I cordially invoke God’s blessings of joy and peace.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 20 July 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. I returned yesterday from a brief stay in Val d’Aosta and I am pleased to have the opportunity offered me by this moment of Marian prayer to make contact, both publicly and intimately, with the Castel Gandolfo community.
I cordially greet you all, citizens of this ancient centre so closely linked to the See of Peter, and I address a special thought to the diocesan Bishop Dante Bernini and his Auxiliary. An affectionate greeting to you too, pilgrims who have gathered here for the prayer of the Angelus.
2. In the middle of summer, during our moments of physical rest and inner relaxation, we are offered an opportunity to pay greater attention to the needs of the spirit. Today I would like to emphasize in particular the importance of listening to the Word of God.
This, by revealing to us the horizons of the Lord’s love, will not fail to enrich the holiday season with a particular note of spirituality, that will lead us then to live our regular activities with a renewed soul.
Sacred Scripture is in fact “a pure and lasting fount of spiritual life”, and the “supreme rule of her faith” (cf. Dei Verbum, n. 21). It is like thirst-quenching water and food that nourishes the life of believers. I therefore invite everyone to cultivate a more intense and frequent contact with the Word of God, letting its healing and creative power work in us.
Perhaps life’s frantic rhythm often prevents many people from taking up the Bible as they would wish. Why not make the most of the holidays to bring it with you and reflect on one or other of its immortal pages?
3. Learning to read Sacred Scripture is fundamental for the believer: it is the first step of a ladder, which continues with meditation and, thus with real prayer. Prayer based on biblical reading is the principal way of Christian spirituality. Those who can dedicate the necessary time and commitment to it, gather abundant fruits.
In this year of preparation for the Great Jubilee in which we are invited to “turn with renewed interest to the Bible”, in order to “recognize who Christ truly is” (Tertio millennio adveniente, n. 40), we pray that every Christian, and whoever is in search of the truth, may become “a pilgrim of Sacred Scripture”, and learn to walk nourishing himself every day with the bread of the Word of Life.
Let us entrust this intention to Mary Most Holy who, by accepting the Word of God, became Mother of the Saviour.
  After praying the Angelus the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims and visitors in various languages.
To the English-speaking visitors he said:
I am pleased to greet the English-speaking visitors who have joined us for the Angelus prayer, especially the members of the Youth Choir from Finland, who will sing for us this evening. During these summer holidays may Almighty God grant all of you his blessings of joy and peace.
The Holy Father ended by greeting the Polish pilgrims and expressing his solidarity with the flood-stricken population:
In my heart and prayers, I am close to those who are experiencing the tragedy of the flood. We assure them of our Christian solidarity. I am pleased to know that my compatriots are generously helping the victims of this disaster. Once again I am united to those who are suffering. God bless you all!
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 13 July 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today I have the joy of holding our usual Sunday gathering for the Angelus prayer amid the mountains of Val d’Aosta, from Les Combes, this marvellous resort, where for the sixth time I am spending a few days on holiday.
I address a fraternal greeting to Bishop Giuseppe Anfossi of Aosta, in gratitude for the hospitality he has kindly offered me. I see represented in him the whole Ecclesial Community of Val d’Aosta which is so dear to me: my cordial greeting goes to each inhabitant of the valley. I also greet the mayor of Introd and express my deep gratitude to him and to the citizens of the village for their kind welcome to this enchanting place.
Lastly I address a warm greeting to all of you, residents of the valley and tourists, who have gathered here to show me your affection. I am grateful to God for this period of rest in the stillness of these mountains, whose majestic sight invites the soul to rise in contemplation of the wisdom and goodness of the Creator.
Today the Second International Meeting of Priests in preparation for the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000 concludes in the great Basilica of Our Lady of Peace in Yamoussoukro, Côte d’Ivoire. For this reason, I now address all those who are taking part in this spiritual gathering, using the link-up set up for this purpose by RAI [the Italian Broadcasting Company], to which I offer my heartfelt thanks.
2. Your Eminences, venerable Brothers in the Episcopate and dear priests who have come to Côte d’Ivoire from various continents, I give you all the kiss of peace.
I respectfully greet the President of Côte d’Ivoire, who has made great efforts for the success of your meeting and who, together with the other authorities of the country and the people of Côte d’Ivoire who are attending in large numbers, has wished to honour the event organized by the Congregation for the Clergy in conjunction with the Congregation for the Evangelization of Peoples.
This type of meeting has a special vallue because, in the atmosphere of fraternal communion created around the Eucharist, you, priests from all the parts of the world, have been encouraged to renew yourselves by becoming more aware of your identity and your mission.
In the spirit of the Letter Tertio millennio adveniente, the days in Yamoussoukro are being conducted in a Christological context: it is because of the priest’s intimate union with Christ that divine mercy can be spread throughout the world by the Word and Sacraments.
3. I am glad that you have paid particular heed to the Post-Synodal Apostolic Exhortation Ecclesia in Africa, and that you have chosen to meet in Africa, which has been the scene of a glorious missionary epic. Ever since the dawn of Christianity, Africa has been distinguished by many splendid saints, and has been nourished even in recent times by the blood of martyrs.
In a special way I wish to exhort the beloved deacons soon to be ordained priests in the Basilica of "Notre-Dame de la Paix" to give a decidedly missionary emphasis to their priestly commitment. All people and all societies have one absolute need: they need Christ, the Way, and the Truth, and the Life! With truly Catholic hearts, take him to others, and strive to live as "other Christs" in every circumstance.
4. I am pleased that the significant pilgrimage to Marian shrines is continuing, because the bond between Mary most holy and the priesthood is truly wondrous. Our consecration to her, our conscious saying to her "totus tuus!", expresses the logic of self-giving for the kingdom and is a guarantee of perseverance and success.
Thinking of the Blessed Virgin’s link with the priesthood and with every priest to whom Jesus has given her as Mother from the Cross, let us recite together the Angelus prayer and ask her who said "yes" to God's saving plans to make us always docile instruments for the true good of souls.
After praying the Angelus the Holy Father expressed his sorrow at the murder of a young Spanish politician, Miguel Angel Blanco Garrido, by the Basque separatist organization ETA, as he prayed for peace and tranquillity in Spain:
I was grieved to hear the news from Spain of the barbaric murder of the young politician Miguel Angel Blanco Garrido. I strongly deplore this act of bloodshed: the killing of an innocent victim can never be justified.
I express my closeness in prayer to his bereaved family.
I ask the Lord to grant the beloved Spanish people courage and tenacity on their way towards coexistence in peace and tranquillity.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Wednesday, 6 July 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. With the beginning of July we have entered the middle of summer, which is also the time for holidays. Schoolchildren have finished the school year. However, I do not want to forget those who are studying for their school-leaving examination: I hope they pass it as successfully as possible.
During July and August many families take their holidays. We all in fact need an occasional period of extended physical, psychological and spiritual rest. Especially for those who live in large cities, it is important that they immerse themselves in nature for a while. Next Wednesday I too will go to the mountains of Val d’Aosta to spend a few days resting and relaxing.
For a vacation to be truly such and bring genuine well-being, in it a person must recover a good balance with himself, with others and with the environment. It is this interior and exterior harmony which revitalizes the mind and reinvigorates body and spirit.
2. One of the values of a holiday is that of meeting and spending time with others in an unselfish way, for the pleasure of friendship and for sharing quiet moments together. However, knowing the human mind and the influences of a consumer society, I would like to suggest, especially to young people, that you take healthy vacations, ones that provide a healthy escape, avoiding harmful abuses of your health and that of others. Otherwise you will end up wasting your time and resources, and you will return from your long-awaited “holidays” without any benefit. Escape can be beneficial, as long as one does not escape from sound moral criteria and simply from the necessary respect for one’s own health.
3. The right to a holiday must not let us forget those who for various reasons cannot leave their everyday surroundings because they are hampered by age, reasons of health or work, financial constraints or other problems. During the summer certain essential public services are even more necessary, and the presence of volunteers, who care for those most alone, proves quite valuable.
Today I would like to entrust everyone’s holidays to Mary most holy, so that they will be peaceful and beneficial, but also the summer of those who cannot go on holiday, so that they will still have a time of relaxation, gladdened by the presence of friends and joyful moments.
  To the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors the Holy Father said:
I am pleased to welcome the English-speaking visitors who have joined us for this Angelus prayer. My special greetings go to the Indonesian pilgrims from Bogor and to the members of the parishes of St Luke and St Paul in the Archdiocese of Melbourne. Upon all of you I cordially invoke the joy and peace of our Lord Jesus Christ.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Solemnity of Sts Peter and Paul
Sunday, 29 June 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The solemn Eucharist in the Vatican Basilica for the Solemnity of the holy Apostles Peter and Paul has just ended. On this occasion, according to an ancient and significant custom, I had the joy of conferring the pallium on recently appointed Metropolitan Archbishops. This rite is particularly eloquent today because it highlights the close communion which unites these prelates with the Bishop of Rome, the Successor of Peter.
The thought of communion and unity was particularly present this week, during which the Second European Ecumenical Assembly took place in Graz, Austria. It closes today; we prayed intensely during these days for full unity among all Christians, in response to Christ’s invitation in the Upper Room: Ut unum sint!
I feel obliged to make myself a zealous promoter of this unity, conscious of the mandate Jesus gave to Peter, the first Bishop of Rome: “Strengthen your brethren” (Lk 22:32).
2. “O Roma felix”, the liturgy of this day sings, “quae tantorum principum es purpurata pretioso sanguine...”. “Rejoice, O Rome, this day; thy walls they once did sign with princely blood, who now their glory share with thee.... What beauty else has earth that may compare with thee?” (Hymn for First Vespers).
Rome owes her beauty and spiritual attraction to the heroic Gospel witness of Sts Peter and Paul. All this is a great responsibility for Rome’s believers, and as the city mission continues, it is emphasizing that fact to great effect.
I know well that living in our city today involves many problems which frequently stifle the spiritual dimension. This is another reason why I invoke our patron saints so that Rome may fulfil her vocation as a universal city with the deepest Christian roots and great openness to the cultures and peoples of the whole world.
3. Dear brothers and sisters, let us imitate the Apostles Peter and Paul. It is not enough to call ourselves Christian, we must be so, that is, we must act as Jesus acted. However, this is impossible without God’s grace.
Let us therefore invoke the intercession of St Peter and St Paul and the motherly protection of Mary, so that our faith may become ever stronger and more missionary and that we, as the Lord Jesus said, may be the “salt of the earth” and the “light of the world” (Mt 5:13, 14).
  After praying the Angelus the Holy Father again called for a peaceful resolution of the ongoing conflict in the Congo (Brazzaville):
My thoughts turn once again to Africa and, specifically, to the city of Brazzaville in the Congo, where unfortunately there are still reports of armed conflicts that impede the work of national and international mediation and the intervention of humanitarian agencies.
I hope that the cease-fire will soon be reinstated and that peace negotiations will be resumed.
I join my voice to that of the Congolese Pastors in asking that our many brothers and sisters may be spared suffering and mourning, and that a peaceful solution to the crisis may soon be achieved.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 22 June 1997
  1. “Reconciliation, gift of God and source of new life”. This is the deep and significant theme of the Ecumenical Assembly of European Christians, which will take place in the next few days in Austria’s beautiful and historic city of Graz. To reflect on and pray for reconciliation is all the more timely in a world that is still suffering so many forms of division. As disciples of Christ, we feel particularly committed to this, also in view of the Jubilee of the Year 2000, when we will commemorate the coming of the Word of God among men. This is what all Christians profess in the Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed: “For us men and for our salvation he came down from heaven; he was born of the Virgin Mary, and became man”.
Reconciliation is a gratuitous gift of God. It is grace, as the Apostle Paul explains to the first Christians of this city of Rome, and through them, to the whole world: “For, if while we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more, now that we are reconciled, shall we be saved by his life” (Rom 5:10). We have been reconciled because we were forgiven, we were forgiven because we were loved. “For God so loved the world that he gave his only Son” (Jn 3:16).
2. Reconciliation with God deeply renews man. Immersed in Christ’s death through Baptism, he rises with him to new life and is called to realize fully in himself the image and likeness of God. In the community relationships are also transformed: reconciliation seeks to extend itself to all our brothers and sisters.
Such a decisive salvation event cannot be contained within a single person or within the narrow circle of a group. Reconciliation must involve everyone: individuals, families, peoples. All the peoples of Europe, from the Atlantic to the Urals, from East to West need it. All humanity needs it.
In this context, the call to reconciliation among Christians is particularly urgent. By the grace of God, the ecumenical movement has already yielded beneficial fruit: it has created a new situation among Christ’s disciples. But there are still unresolved problems and sometimes unexpected upsets occur, new fears arise and unconscious worries creep in. With its programme of meeting, exchange and prayer, the Graz Assembly for Europe is meant to reinforce the dialogue of love, the only one that can really promote the theological dialogue, which still has a very demanding path to follow.
3. I invite everyone present here and those listening to me to join in prayer with the delegates to the European Ecumenical Assembly, convoked in Graz by the Council of European Episcopal Conferences and the Conference of European Churches. For my part, I assure you of a constant remembrance for the success of this important meeting.
May the Lord accompany us on the way to full communion, as he did the pilgrims on the road to Emmaus. May the Mother of God, who prayed with the Apostles in the Upper Room as they waited for the gift of the Spirit, support your journey. It would be a cause of very great joy if, at the dawn of the third millennium, we Christians could proclaim, with greater harmony and unity, that Christ is the one Saviour of the world.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Wednesday, 15 June 1997
  1. On Tuesday last I returned from an Apostolic Visit which enabled me once again to visit Poland, the land of my birth. At the General Audience next Wednesday I will have the opportunity to reflect on this Pastoral Visit. Today, at the Sunday gathering for our Marian prayer, I feel the desire and the profound duty to offer fervent thanks to the Lord for this most recent gift of his bounty. And my thoughts run naturally to the various stages of my pilgrimage, on which I felt at every step the constant presence of Mary, venerated as Mother of the Church and Queen of Poland. I am thinking especially of Czêstochowa and Zakopane.
2. It was deeply moving for me to return as a pilgrim to the feet of Our Lady of Jasna Góra. To her I entrusted the Church’s journey towards the Holy Door of the Jubilee of the Year 2000, and particularly to the horizons which are unfolding for her mission in the third millennium. To her I entrusted the Polish nation and all the nations of Europe, called to build their integration on solid spiritual, cultural and ethical foundations, beginning with their common Christian roots, whose shining example is the figure and work of St Adalbert, commemorated on the 1000th anniversary of his martyrdom. To Mary I entrusted the commitment of Christians to advancing towards full unity, in accordance with Christ’s will and the demands of the new evangelization; I also called on her for reconciliation and peace for all peoples.
In Zakopane I dedicated a shrine to her Immaculate Heart, in memory of that 13 May 1981, a very significant day in my life. With their sturdy, simple faith, the people of Zakopane deeply desired that shrine at the cost of great sacrifice and have earned the joy of a beautiful meeting with the Bishop of Rome, who had been their Bishop for so many years.
3. Among the People of God, Mary most holy is the first custodian of the memory of Christ and of the hope that flows from him. Making a pilgrimage to the sources of Marian devotion in my country, especially to Jasna Góra, means returning to our roots and receiving new strength from them to respond fully to the Lord’s will on our way towards the third millennium.
I would like to conclude by recalling the words which I addressed to the Blessed Virgin at the shrine of Jasna Góra:
O “Virgin, Mother of God, help us to enter the third millennium of Christianity through the holy door of faith, hope and charity”.
4. Violence does not cease to engulf some peoples of Africa with the greatest suffering. I am thinking in particular of the people of Sierra Leone, prey to so many dangers. I hope that the attempts at international mediation currently in progress will lead to a return to constitutional order and normality.
May the same solidarity be shown to the inhabitants of Brazzaville in the Congo, who for days have been hostage to a bloody civil war. With the Congolese Bishops, I forcefully repeat that only love and respect for individuals and the law can guarantee a future of national harmony and prosperity for everyone.
Let us entrust to Mary, Queen of Peace, all the peoples of Africa, as we implore from the Lord eternal rest for the victims of so many conflicts, consolation for families in hardship and wisdom for political leaders.
5. Today, our Orthodox brethren are celebrating Pentecost. Let us join them in imploring the Holy Spirit to pour forth his gifts upon all Christians. These gifts are the profound source of our unity. The Holy Spirit is guiding us to full unity. It is our task to listen to his suggestions and inspirations in accordance with the insistant exhortation of the author of Revelation: “He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches” (Rv 2:7ff.).
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
APOSTOLIC JOURNEY
OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL II
TO POLAND (MAY 31-JUNE 10, 1997)
ANGELUS
Krakow — 8 June 1997 
  Our meeting at Blonia Krakowskie would not be complete if we did not turn, with the recitation of the Angelus, to Mary, the Mother of Jesus, entrusting to her everything that the canonization of Queen Hedwig highlights: the future of faith and culture, love and justice in our country and in the world. The beginnings of the history of faith in this land were sanctified by the blood of martyrs and the holiness of confessors. Today, at the end of the Second Millennium of Christianity we are walking in their footsteps, that we may draw from their faith new strength. Upon our perseverance in the faith of the Fathers, upon the fervour of our hearts and the openness of our minds depend in fact whether the future generations will be led to Christ by the same testimony of holiness that has been left to us by Saint Adalbert, Saint Stanislaus and Queen Saint Hedwig. It depends on our faith and love whether the Gospel will bring results in every area of life, results akin to those borne so far by Christianity in our lands. Saint Hedwig leads us to the foot of the Cross where Our Lady of Sorrows too keeps watch. Listening attentively to Christ's command to foster love of God and of neighbour, we entrust to Mary every effort made to bring this about, as we approach the Third Millennium — tertio millennio adveniente.
The young people are present here in such large numbers! My heart rejoices to see you, dear young people, for your youth and enthusiasm. I thank you for taking part in this canonization. I know that it has now become an annual tradition for you to go at this time of year in pilgrimage to Kalwaria to thank God, through the intercession of Mary, for all the graces of the school year which is coming to an end. Today you have come here. You wish to share with the young Queen, your special Patroness, your desire to visit on this day the Mother venerated at Kalwaria. This too is a tradition, a tradition much older than that of Kalwaria.
Young people, especially the young people of Krakow, have always had a special veneration and love for Queen Hedwig. Generations and generations of scholars, students and school-children would come to her tomb. It became a custom that at her tomb in Wawel they would lay the badges of their schools and other emblems. As if to say that they wanted to preserve a profound link between her wisdom and holiness and their own aspirations and future. Young people are attracted by wisdom. They are fascinated by the deep things of the spirit. Ever since the foundation of the University of Krakow, young people have been an inseparable part of the image of this city. It can be said that Krakow owes to the wise decision of Saint Hedwig the fact that it has always remained a city of youth.
3. There is another thing that especially makes me dwell on the subject of young people. The "Light-Life" Movement or, as it was first called, "Oases of the Living Church" is celebrating the Twenty-fifth Anniversary of its foundation. Actually, as far as I recall, its beginnings go back even further into the past, back to the 1950s; but this past quarter century has been the period of its regular pastoral work. I would like to mention my experiences of the "Oases", which as Archbishop of Krakow I was very closely associated with from the very beginning.
After 1979, in Poland various apostolic movements were able to develop — perhaps the younger generation does not remember what the experience of the "Oases of the Living Church" meant for us in the period of the Communist governments. As Bishop I took part in that experience, and I did so with all my heart. Many times I went to meet Oases groups making retreats at various places in the Archdiocese. I enjoyed every meeting, especially in the vacation period, in the summer months. I used to go to Oases groups all over the Archdiocese of Krakow and I would also defend the movement from the dangers posed by the security services of that time. Everyone knew — both the priests and the young people themselves — that the Cardinal of Krakow was with them, that he backed them, supported them and was ready to defend them in case of danger. In 1973 I entrusted the activity of this movement to the Immaculate Mother of the Church.
With my mind and heart I wish to think back once more to all those places where we used to meet the Oases and, in praying the Angelus, thank Mary Immaculate for this work which without a doubt contributed to victory, in keeping with the words of the great Cardinal August Hlond, primate of Poland: "Victory, if it comes, will certainly be a victory through Mary".
To the protection of Mary, Mother of the Church, I entrust also the other youth organizations and movements in Krakow and Poland: the university chaplaincy communities, charity groups that serve the needs of the sick and the handicapped, and especially the so-called "Apostolic Groups" and the Catholic Youth Association which is being revived.
The Angel of the Lord . . .
  After the Angelus:
I wish once more to offer a cordial greeting to the Cardinals present: Cardinal Franciszek, who is our host for today's meeting, the Cardinal Primate and the Cardinal Metropolitan of Wrocław . I also greet the Cardinals of the Roman Curia and of the Episcopal Sees in various countries. I thank them for accompanying me on this pilgrimage. I am pleased that there is also with us Archbishop Audrys Jozuas Backis of Vilnius. I cordially greet him. I extend words of fraternal greeting also to all the Archbishops and Bishops present.
In addition, I greet the representatives of the Polish Parliament with the President of the Sejm of the Republic of Poland, Józef Zych; the representatives of the Government administration with the President of the Province, Jacek Majchrowski, and the representatives of the local authorities with the Mayor of Krakow, Józef Lassota, with the President of the local assembly, Marek Nawara, and the President of the City Council, Stanislaw Handzlik.
I greet all the guests from abroad, represented by their Ambassadors and Consuls. In a special way I wish to thank, for their participation in this liturgy, the Mayors of the cities connected with Saint Hedwig — Vilnius and Budapest — and all the faithful of Lithuania, Hungary, Ukraine and Belarus.
With all my heart I embrace the faithful from all the Polish Dioceses and the Sisters and Brothers of the Church in Krakow. While the whole Church is getting ready for the Jubilee of the Second Millennium of Christianity, the Diocese of Krakow is approaching the end of its own first millennium. I know that by means of parish missions and the new Visit of parishes by a copy of the picture of Our Lady of Czestochowa you wish to prepare yourselves for this special event. May this preparation produce abundant fruit.
God bless you!
 
APOSTOLIC JOURNEY
OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL II
TO POLAND (MAY 31-JUNE 10, 1997)
ANGELUS
Wrocław  — 1 June 1997
  "We greet you, O living Host,
in which is concealed the divinity of Jesus Christ!"
1. At the end of this solemn Eucharistic celebration we turn our thoughts to Mary as we recite the Angelus. We are all familiar with this prayer. We know that it recalls the scene of the Annunciation. "The angel of the Lord declared unto Mary and she conceived of the Holy Spirit". The moment of the Annunciation is also the moment of the virginal conception of the Son of God. Thus this Marian prayer, which we recite three times a day, reminds us of this great mystery of the Incarnation. "Hail, O favoured one, the Lord is with you . . . Blessed are you among women and blessed is the fruit of your womb!" (Lk 1:28,42).
This Sunday, at the end of the Statio Orbis, which closes the Eucharistic Congress at Wrocław , we are aware of a particular connection between the mystery of the Incarnation and the Eucharist. "The Word was made flesh and dwelt among us", we repeat in the Angelus. It is precisely this flesh which becomes Eucharist when the priest pronounces over the bread and wine the words which Christ pronounced in the Upper Room: "This is my body which will be given up for you". Body and Blood. "This is the cup of my blood, the blood of the new and everlasting covenant. It will be shed for you and for all. Do this in memory of me!" (cf. 1 Cor 11:24-25). This wonderful link between the mystery of the Incarnate Word and the Eucharist is beautifully expressed in a Polish Eucharistic hymn:
"We greet you, O living Host,
in which is concealed the divinity of Jesus Christ.
Hail Jesus, Son of Mary,
in the Blessed Host you are true God".
2. Thus the Angelus reveals to us its Eucharistic depths. Christ, in the Sacrifice of the Altar, under the appearance of bread and wine, gives us as food his Body and Blood, which by the power of the Holy Spirit was given to him by his Mother, Mary. God the Father, choosing Mary as the Mother of his only Son, united her in a special way to the Eucharist.
Mary, teach us to understand ever more fully this great mystery of faith, so that with joy and gratitude we may always welcome the invitation of your Son: "Take this and eat it, this is my Body. Take this and drink it, this is my Blood".
"We greet you, O Bread of angels,
we adore you in this Sacrament.
Hail Jesus, Son of Mary,
in the Blessed Host you are true God".
3. May the mystery of the Eucharist penetrate your whole lives. From the Eucharist may your love of God and neighbour draw strength, may your faith be enkindled and your hope renewed.
Glorifying the presence of Christ in the Eucharist, let us also give thanks to God for the gift of the priesthood. The priesthood and the Eucharist are inseparably united. The priest is the minister of the Eucharist. In the Church community it is he who fulfils in a particular way Christ's command: "Do this in memory of me". Conformed to Christ the Priest by the Sacrament of Holy Orders, it is by the power of Christ that he celebrates the Eucharistic Sacrifice. There is no priesthood without the Eucharist. There is no Eucharistic Sacrifice without the priesthood. The Angelus which we are about to recite should therefore also become an act of thanksgiving for the gift of the priesthood and a great prayer for new vocations. May many hear the call of the "Lord of the harvest" and utter with Mary the generous fiat of their response to God. Let us ask the Blessed Virgin Mary to obtain for the Church from her Son many dedicated ministers of the Eucharist.
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 25 May 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today’s solemn liturgy invites us to contemplate the mystery of the Most Holy Trinity. This mystery is inaccessible to our minds but is revealed to us by Jesus, the Son of God made man. “No one has ever seen God”, says the Evangelist John, “the only Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he has made him known” (Jn 1:18).
The Trinity professed by Christianity in no way prejudices the unity of God. The one God is not presented to our gaze as a “solitary” God, but as a God-communion. The First Letter of John marvellously expresses the mystery when it says: “God is love” (1 Jn 4:8).
Yes, God not only loves, but loving is his very essence.
We are all called to have a living experience of this ineffable mystery of love. “If a man loves me”, Jesus has assured us, “he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our home with him” (Jn 14:23).
2. From Trinitarian love our thoughts turn to the mystery of love revealed in the Holy Eucharist. The 46th International Eucharistic Congress, which I myself will have the joy of concluding next Sunday, begins today in Wroclaw. In the Eucharist we find the synthesis and the apex of Christianity. Under the appearances of the consecrated bread and wine, Christ continues to live among his own, makes his sacrifice on Golgotha constantly present, and is the nourishment and strength of his people.
The Eucharistic mystery, in line with the redemptive Incarnation, directly concerns Christ alone, but the whole Trinity is involved in it. In fact, the Eucharistic presence comes about by the power of the Holy Spirit, and all is accomplished under the gaze of the Father, who in the Eucharistic bread continues to give us his Only-begotten Son, who offers him the sacrifice of praise on behalf of all creation.
3. Mystery of faith! Let us ask the Blessed Virgin to help us penetrate ever more deeply into the mystery of the Eucharist and the mystery of the Most Holy Trinity.
May Mary, “Sanctae Trinitatis domicilium”—dwelling-place of the Most Holy Trinity (St Proclus of Constantinople, Oratio VI, 17), help us to perceive in world events the signs of God's presence, the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit. Through her intercession may we love Christ with all our heart and walk towards the vision of the Trinity, the wondrous goal to which our life is directed.
  After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
Next Thursday, following ancient tradition, the Diocese of Rome will celebrate the Solemnity of Corpus Christi. In the late afternoon we will gather in St John Lateran Square to celebrate the Eucharist, which will be followed by a procession through the city streets to the Basilica of St Mary Major. I invite you to take part in this solemn public act of faith and love for Jesus in the Eucharist, present in the midst of his Church.
    © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CAELI
Pentecost Sunday
Sunday, 18 May 1997
  1. Today the Church celebrates and relives the extraordinary event of Pentecost, which marks the beginning of her universal mission of evangelization.
The Evangelist John testifies that when the risen Christ appeared to the Apostles in the Upper Room on Easter evening, “he breathed on them and said to them: ‘Receive the Holy Spirit. If you forgive the sins of any they are forgiven; ...’” (Jn 20:22-23). Christ himself then asked the Eleven not to leave Jerusalem but to wait for the outpouring of the Spirit, whom the Father would send from “on high” (cf. Lk 24:49). The event that occurred 50 days after Easter is thus the completion of the paschal mystery.
2. Just as John depicts Mary at the foot of the Cross, Luke records her presence in the Upper Room on the day of Pentecost, in prayer with the Apostles. This double icon fully expresses Mary’s role in the mystery of Christ and the Church, as the Second Vatican Ecumenical Council teaches (Lumen gentium, chap. VIII).
Mary is the model of the Church, which knows how to listen silently to God’s words of love and invokes the gift of the Holy Spirit, a divine fire that warms men's hearts and illumines their steps on the ways of justice and peace.
3. “True peace unto us bring”, we sing today in the hymn Veni Creator. Let us ardently implore the Holy Spirit to spread his peace among the still numerous situations of conflict: in particular, among the people of Kinshasa who are witnessing the end of a long and troubled crisis in their country. Let us pray that with an orderly, peaceful transition the civil community will advance towards a future of freedom and prosperity, with respect for every person’s rights.
May God help everyone to regard others as his brothers and sisters and in this way to work together in building a nation reconciled in love.
Let us also invoke the Holy Spirit for the Rwandan refugees. He is the “Father of the poor”. May he open hearts, so that no one will remain insensitive to their tragic lot.
Let us entrust them all to the motherly protection of Mary most holy.
  After praying the Regina Caeli the Holy Father said:
With my gaze turned to Mary, I thank all those who have expressed their congratulations to me for my brithday and have assured me of a special prayer as a sign of affectionate closeness.
I ask the Blessed Virgin to obtain the gift of fidelity from the Lord for me and for all the Church. “Totus tuus”, I repeat today, trusting in the ceaseless protection of the Mother of God, so that the message of salvation, thanks to everyone's generous contribution, may reach the very ends of the earth.
I now affectionately greet the Spanish and Italian-speaking pilgrims, particularly the faithful of Our Lady of Divine Providence Parish in San Severo, who have come to commemorate the 10th anniversary of my Pastoral Visit to their Diocese. I also extend a cordial greeting to the members of the National Association of Carabinieri from the local branch of Zero Branco in the Diocese of Treviso, to the group of Emigrants of Enego from the Diocese of Padua, to the “Moto-Club” youth group from San Zenone degli Ezzelini in the Diocese of Treviso, and to the faithful of St Michael’s Parish in Borgo.
Lastly, I greet the delegation from the World Wildlife Fund and, as I express my appreciation of their commitment to respect for nature, I hope that everyone will develop an authentic ecological awareness in service to the culture of life and to respect for all creation.
I wish everyone a happy feast of Pentecost and cordially impart a special Apostolic Blessing.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
APOSTOLIC JOURNEY
OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL II
 TO LEBANON (MAY 10-11, 1997)
REGINA CAELI
Sunday, 11 May 1997
  1. At the end of this celebration, at the time of the Marian prayer, we also invoke the saints who lived in this land. With you, I pray to St Maron, St Charbel and Bl. Rafka. I am also thinking of Venerable Al-Hardini, whom I soon hope to have the joy to enrol among the blesseds.
With you, I entrust all the sons and daughters of the country to Our Lady of Lebanon. May the Mother of the Lord, present at the foot of the Cross and in the Upper Room at Pentecost, gather in faith, hope and love her children present in the country or dispersed throughout the world! May she help your pastors in their ministry! May she sustain the fidelity to prayer and charitable service of monks and nuns, of men and women religious! May she accompany lay people in their ecclesial life and in their service to society! May she strengthen families in unity and love and in devotion to their educational mission! May she guide young people on the paths of life!
May Mary, in her motherly tenderness, comfort the poorest, those who are suffering in body or mind, prisoners and refugees!
2. Our Lady of Lebanon, watch over all the people who live in this land so sorely tried! The Successor of Peter, who has come here to bring all a message of faith and hope, entrusts them to you. On the threshold of the third Christian millennium, may we see the prophetic message of Isaiah fulfilled: “Is it not a very little while until Lebanon shall be turned into a fruitful field, and the fruitful field shall be regarded as a forest?” (29:17)!
O Most Holy Virgin, grant that this people of ancient origins but ever young may remain the worthy heir of their distinguished history and build their future dynamically in dialogue with all, in mutual respect for the different groups and in fraternal harmony!
Queen of Peace, protect Lebanon!
Queen of Peace, we pray you, hear us!
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CAELI
Sunday, 4 May 1997
  1. During this celebration I have had the opportunity of raising five new blesseds to the altars who witness to the diversity of ways to follow the common vocation to holiness. We are now preparing to honour the Blessed Virgin with the recitation of the Regina Caeli, a Marian prayer proper to the Easter season.
Amidst this joy, I would like to greet affectionately the many Bishops, civil authorities and pilgrims who have come from Spain and Latin America to venerate these great children of the Church. May their examples shine out in your countries and may their intercession sustain you in your tasks. May Mary Most Holy, whose devoted children the new blesseds were, make the warmth of her motherly protection felt by all of you and your families.
2. I address a special greeting to the Italian-speaking pilgrims who have come to take part in today’s celebration. In particular, I greet the Archbishop, priests and faithful from the Diocese of Reggio Calabria, to whose clergy the blessed priest Gaetano Catanoso belonged. I also greet the Bishops and faithful of the Diocese of Cremona, where Bl. Enrico Rebuschini lived and worked. Dear brothers and sisters, may the exceptional witness of these two new blesseds, their ardent faith and generous dedication to the suffering and the marginalized, renew in each one the joy of following Christ, so as to be the “salt” and “light” in every walk of life.
I next address a cordial greeting to the members of the Kalos, Rom, Sinti, Manush and Kaolie communities, and to every other nomadic community. You have come here in large numbers and full of enthusiasm to take part in the beatification of a son of your people, Ceferino Giménez Malla: welcome! O del andatumen kate naisisaras sia le devles. T’aven bahtale tai saste tai train miro! (God has brought you here, let us all thank the Lord. May you be fortunate, have good health and live in peace)!
3. May Mary Queen of all the saints help us to imitate the new blesseds' shining example, in order to experience the power of their intercession and have a foretaste of that bond of communion, which we hope to enjoy for eternity in the Father’s house.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
APOSTOLIC JOURNEY
OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL II
 TO THE CZECH REPUBLIC (APRIL 25-27, 1997)
REGINA CAELI
Letná, Sunday, 27 April 1997
    Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. At the end of this Eucharistic Celebration I invite you to turn to Mary and recite the Regina Caeli, as we are in the habit of doing during the Easter season. The Orthodox Churches, indeed, are celebrating Easter today. To them goes our greeting: Christ is risen, alleluia!
We thus have many reasons for saying to the Blessed Virgin: "Queen of Heaven, rejoice!" Is not the celebration of the millennium of the Martyrdom of Saint Adalbert a cause for joy? Recalling the glorious testimony of this exemplary image of a Pastor, untiring in proclaiming Christ to those near and far, we have been listening to his voice. He is speaking still! With the compelling power of example he proposes to Bishops, priests, consecrated persons and young people the ideal of a life generously spent for the Lord and for others. He encourages everyone to follow the dictates of an upright conscience, to open their hearts to the values of justice, brotherhood, love and peace. He likewise addresses to every son and daughter of this nation an invitation to foster unity in diversity, to promote culture, and to harness the heart's deepest aspirations in the quest of the common good.
2. "Queen of Heaven, rejoice!" Another cause of joy are the saintly figures, men and women saints who have made this land great: Ludmilla, Wenceslaus, Adalbert, the roots of the Czech nation, born from the stock planted by the two brothers from Thessalonika, Cyril and Methodius, and by their disciples.
Then in the following centuries Procopius, the humble Benedictine; Agnes of Bohemia, totally devoted to God and the poor; Zdislava, exemplary wife and mother in the daily life of the Castle of Lemberk. In this host of saints there are not lacking priests and martyrs, such as John Nepomucene and John Sarkander, and missionaries, such as John Nepomucene Neumann. Truly here the Gospel has not been preached in vain!
Seven years ago, precisely on this esplanade of Letná, I said to you what I also wish to repeat today: "Your Christian history ... is not over. Your saints are not silent ... Your saints are alive. They are the guarantors of your past and of your future" (Homily, 21 April 1990, No. 4).
3. "Regina caeli laetare, alleluia!" Let us too rejoice therefore with the Mother of God and look to the future with souls full of hope.
Dear Brothers and Sisters, may Mary present to her Risen Son your generous promises of fidelity and spiritual renewal, at the end of the Millennium of Saint Adalbert, as we look forward to the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000.
We rejoice with you, Mother of the Church, and we thank you for these great gifts. Do not forget this people: accompany them with your maternal protection, now and for ever.
Queen of Heaven, rejoice!
 
 JOHN PAUL II
‘REGINA CAELI’
Sunday, 20 April 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. This morning I had the joy of ordaining priests 31 deacons of the Diocese of Rome. It is all the more significant that this inspiring rite should take place on the World Day of Prayer for Vocations. Let us together thank the Lord for the gift of the priesthood, which is renewed in these newly ordained. Let us thank their families, their teachers and those responsible for their formation who have guided them over the years and have accompanied them to the altar today. Let us thank these new priests, who with great generosity have given their lives to Christ and have become tangible signs of hope for the Church and for the world.
The priest is a “man of hope”, not because he relies on his human strength and resources — indeed he continues to be burdened by human frailty — but because sacramental grace sustains him and makes him a living icon of Christ the Good Shepherd, who “lays down his life for his sheep” (Jn 10:11). This is what Jesus expects from his ministers. Their life has meaning, if it is a life that is “laid down”, illumined by the risen Christ.
2. Last Sunday I was in Sarajevo, a city that symbolizes our century, a land of suffering and hope. I thank the Lord for the peace process that has begun and I hope it will bring lasting fruits of reconciliation and solidarity. During my visit I had the opportunity to appreciate the activity of the ecclesial institutions, governments, international organizations and all who have worked to alleviate that people’s suffering and hardship. It is now necessary to proceed without delay in coming to the aid of those who have been sorely stricken during the tragic conflict, and to help the victims who are still suffering the consequences. This is the time for moral and material rebuilding. Let us continue to be close to the people of that beloved region with our effective solidarity.
Dear brothers and sisters, as I thank you for accompanying me in spirit on my pilgrimage to Sarajevo last Saturday and Sunday, I entrust another Apostolic Visit to your prayers. At the end of the week I will be going to the Czech Republic to celebrate the millennium of the martyrdom of St Adalbert, the first Bishop of Prague of Bohemian blood, a Benedictine monk, a courageous missionary and a fearless witness to the truth.
3. Let us commend to Mary, a woman of faith and hope, our prayer intentions: the peoples of Sarajevo and Bosnia-Hercegovina, my visit to the Czech Republic and especially the newly ordained, and with them all the priests of the world, so that following St Adalbert’s example, they may daily offer their lives for their brothers and sisters.
  After praying the Regina Caeli the Holy Father made a pressing appeal to ban antipersonnel mines, which continue to kill and maim innocent people years after hostilities have ended:
Today a large group of representatives from the Italian campaign to ban anti-personnel mines is present in St Peter’s Square. These deadly devices continue in various parts of the world to kill and maim, especially innocent people, even years after hostilities have ended, preventing the countries and regions that are victims of this scourge from returning to a normal social and economic life. I pray the Lord of peace to instil in government leaders the courage to listen to the cry of these victims, and to bring to a successful conclusion, as quickly as possible, the negogiations in progress for the total elimination of these treacherous weapons.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
APOSTOLIC VISIT OF JOHN PAUL II TO SARAJEVO
REGINA CAELI
Kosevo stadium
13 April 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. At the end of this solemn Concelebration, while throughout the world in accordance with an ancient and beautiful tradition a hymn of praise is raised to the Mother of God with the Regina Caeli, my thoughts turn in prayer to the entire region in which there live, together with other peoples, the Southern Slavs. A significant trait links the Christians of these lands: their profound devotion and great love for the Mother of God.
With intense gratitude to God I remember the visits that I have been able to make to Albania, in April 1993, to Croatia, in September 1994, and to Slovenia, in May of last year. As my stay in Sarajevo and in Bosnia-Hercegovina draws to a close, I wish to send a cordial greeting to the people of the neighbouring Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, whom I long to visit and whom I accompany in solidarity, and in prayer, in their difficulties and their hopes. My good wishes go also to the people of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, upon whom I invoke from the Lord peace and prosperity.
2. As in every other part of the world, so too in this region the Holy See promotes respect of the equal dignity of peoples and of their right to choose freely their own future. At the same time, the Holy See works to safeguard every possible occasion of mutual solidarity in a climate of peaceful civil coexistence.
This requires the courage of farsightedness and the patience of small steps, in order that the spirit of frank and constructive understanding may flourish until it bears abundant fruit. A climate of peace and mutual respect is the only way to combat most effectively unbridled nationalism, the cause of so much sorrow and so much past and present destruction.
These lands, in which East and West have most intensely experienced the difficulty of dialogue and mutual cooperation, have become the symbol of our century filled with bitterness but also rich with promise for the whole of Europe.
3. From Sarajevo, the city symbolizing this twentieth century as it draws to a close, may all the peoples of Europe hear the call for a united commitment on the path to peace! May the new millennium now at our doorstep open with a determined resolve to build an era of social growth in harmony, with the contribution of the particular gifts with which each nation, in the course of its history, has been enriched by God, the Lord and Father of all peoples!
This is the heartfelt hope which along with you I confidently entrust to Mary, Queen of Peace, invoking her with the traditional prayer of the Easter season.
 
JOHN PAUL II
‘REGINA CAELI’
Sunday, 6 April 1997
  1. “Peace be with you!” (Jn 20:19-21). This is the risen Lord’s greeting to the Apostles. In today’s liturgy we hear it several times. Peace be with you! It was the customary Jewish greeting, but on Jesus’ lips it is filled with new meaning. The Risen One presents himself as the source of peace, a peace that is not merely the absence of war but full communion with God and with our brothers and sisters.
May the Risen One's greeting echo in every corner of the earth, in this age of ours that is so tried by violence. Peace be with you! It is not only a greeting but a gift. Jesus assures us that peace is possible, because he gives us both its secret and its strength. He comes to dislodge us from that comfortable pessimism which sometimes makes us think that war and violence are inevitable, and to take refuge in our own security and borders, as if the suffering of distant brothers and sisters did not pertain to us and we could rightly abandon them to their own destiny. No, this is not so! The peace offered by Christ is a duty incumbent on us all and commits us to having a truly “universal” heart.
2. Meditating today on Christ's words to the Apsotles: “If you forgive the sins of any, they are forgiven; if you retain the sins of any, they are retained” (Jn 20:22-23), how is it possible not to think of the gift of divine mercy which constantly renews humanity?
God’s merciful love regenerates every human being; it is by accepting the gift of mercy from the risen Lord that we can build a reconciled world, truly open to the horizons of life, of full and deep joy in the Triune God. After Easter, man is no longer a being for death, but a being for life. The abyss of death has been destroyed by the risen Christ’s explosion of life.
In the Eastern icon of the anastasis, Jesus is portrayed raising Adam and Eve from the tomb and calling them back to life. Jesus’ glorification is a “premiss” and “promise” of our glorification, as long as we do not refuse the gift of his merciful love by which we can participate in the risen Christ's feast of life.
3. May the Blessed Virgin help us to make her Son’s new life our own, by accepting the gift of divine mercy which enables us to be artisans of forgiveness, reconciliation and peace. May she inspire in all who have governmental responsibilities at the national and international level the necessary courage to intervene promptly and wisely in difficult situations before they become irreparable and more blood is shed in vain.
After praying the Regina Caeli, the Holy Father said:
I greet the Italian-speaking pilgrims, in particular the volunteers of the “Parkinson Action” association and I hope that the World Day of Parkinson's, taking place next Friday, will help sensitize public opinion to this disease and assist all who are afflicted with it.
I greet the Shalom Choir of the parish of Marsico Nuovo, Potenza; the faithful of St Justina in Rimini, a parish — the only one in Italy — which last summer welcomed the body of St Therese of the Child Jesus, the 100th centenary of whose death we are celebrating this year.
I hope you all have a pleasant Sunday, in the peace of the risen Christ!
On this Sunday on which the Church recalls the appearance of the risen Christ to the Apostle Thomas, I extend a special greeting to the priests, religious and laity of the Syro-Malabar and Syro-Malankara Churches present here in St Peter’s Square. I pray that the ancient Eastern-rite Churches of the St Thomas Christians will continue to flourish and to grow in mutual co-operation, missionary zeal and ecumenical understanding. Upon all the English-speaking pilgrims present I invoke the grace and peace of the Lord.
Thank you for taking part in this beautiful prayer of the Regina Caeli. The weather has changed somewhat since this morning. This morning it was very sunny; now we cannot even see Monte Cavo, but rain too serves a purpose. Best wishes for the trip to Sarajevo in a week’s time.
At the recitation of the Regina Caeli on Sunday, 6 April, the Holy Father appealed to world leaders to protect children from becoming participants in warfare.
Over the next few days, the United Nations Commission for Human Rights, currently meeting in Geneva, will be addressing child rights and, in particular, the legal protection of minors in armed conflicts. I have mentioned this troubling issue several times, as well as in last year's message for the World Day of Peace.
I would like to stress the Church’s deep concern about respect for the child and for the integral and harmonious development of his personality. I therefore renew my appeal to political and social leaders that, inspired by the principles of morality and law, they will do everything to prevent children from becoming participants in war, being forced to bears arms and kill their peers. If we want peace, let us teach peace to those who are being prepared to build the society of the future.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
‘REGINA CAELI’
Monday, 31 March 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today is Easter Monday, traditionally called “Monday of the Angel”, because angels appeared beside the women and the Apostles with a significant role in the extraordinary event of the Resurrection. It was precisely an angel who addressed the first message from the empty tomb to the women who had come to finish the burial arrangements for Jesus’ body. He says to them: “Do not be amazed; you seek Jesus of Nazareth, who was crucified. He has risen, he is not here” (Mk 16:6).
Angels are discreetly present at all the most important moments of Jesus’ life in addition to the Resurrection. They announce his birth (cf. Mt 1:20; Lk 1:26; 2:9); they guide his flight into Egypt and his return to his native land (cf. Mt 2:13, 19); they are a comfort to him at the end of the temptations in the desert (cf. Mt 4:11) and at the hour of the passion (cf. Lk 22:43); at the end of time, they will stand at his side when he judges history and the world (cf.Mt 13:41).
2. Angels, then, serve God’s designs at the fundamental moments of salvation history. As God’s envoys, they function as messengers of his redeeming will.
Their presence is seen by Scripture and by the Church's uninterrupted faith as the sign of a special intervention of Providence and as the announcement of new realities which bring with them redemption and salvation.
Today’s feast therefore prolongs the intense joy of Easter. The liturgy says over and over: “This is the day the Lord has made, let us rejoice and be glad!”. The Easter proclamation which the divine messenger addressed to the women is repeated to each of us by our guardian angel: “Do not be afraid! Open your hearts to the risen Christ!”.
3. By putting his angel beside us, the Lord intends to accompany every moment of our lives with his love and protection, so that we can fight the good fight of faith (cf. 1 Tm 6:12), and give fearless and unhesitating testimony of our loyalty to the One who died and rose for our redemption.
Let us invoke the Queen of angels and saints, that she may grant us, supported by our guardian angels, to be authentic witnesses to the Lord's paschal mystery.
After praying the Regina Caeli, the Holy Father said:
The joy of Easter has been clouded by the tragic news of the sinking of a motor boat laden with Albanian refugees in the Straits of Otranto.
I invite you to pray for all those who met their death in the Adriatic Sea, and I urge you to show sympathy and solidarity for the devastating sorrow of those who are suffering the loss of their loved ones.
I warmly encourage the aid work carried out by Caritas in Apulia and by various institutions and individuals on behalf of the refugees. And I hope that efforts will be redoubled to bring Albania not only essential aid but also social order and peace, as well as co-operation in re-establishing its productive sector, so that the beloved Albanian nation can recover and build its own future in harmony and serenity.
To the English speaking pilgrims and visitors the Holy Father said:
I extend a special greeting to the Mississippi Mass Choir, from Jackson. Thank you for your inspiring music. May God bless you all. Happy Easter!
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
 JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS - PALM SUNDAY
Sunday, 23 March 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. At the start of spring those who are in the “springtime of life”, today, Palm Sunday, are celebrating the One who is the Life, Jesus Christ, because he alone has the words of eternal life and can transform all of life into springtime.
From 19 to 24 August next, young people from Ecclesial Communities throughout the world have been given an appointment in Paris to continue their great pilgrimage across the globe. The last, unforgettable stop took place in January 1995 in Manila. Dear young people, let us walk together on this pilgrimage of faith and hope, carrying the Cross of Christ, sign of the Love that saves the world.
See you in Paris!
2. It is only a few months until World Youth Day, which will be held from 19 to 24 August. I invite the young people from every continent gathered in this square and all of you listening to me on radio or television to come to Paris, France, for these days. In the meantime, do not hesitate to ask Christ the question his disciples asked in St John’s Gospel: “Teacher, where are you staying?” (Jn 1:38). With your friends from other nations and cultures, come and receive the answer which the Successors of the Apostles, your Bishops, will pass on to you: “Come and see” (Jn 1:46). With Cardinal Jean-Marie Lustiger, Archbishop of Paris, with the Bishops and the whole Church in France which is preparing to welcome you, I am expecting you and say to you: do what you can to enter the third millennium as sons and daughters of God!
3. I greet the English-speaking young people here today. May this Holy Week and Easter be for you a time of profound conversion. May the passion, death and resurrection of the Lord lead each one of you to genuine commitment and joyful generosity in living your faith. I look forward to seeing many of you in Paris! God be with you.
4. I greet the young people of Spain and Latin America. I invite you, in communion with all the People of God who are journeying to the Jubilee of the Year 2000, to fix your gaze on Jesus, the Teacher and Lord of life, according to the words of the Gospel: “Teacher, where are you staying? Come and see” (cf. Jn 1:38-39). I also invite you to participate in the next World Youth Day, which we will celebrate this August in Paris.
On your journey of faith, dear young people, my affection and Blessing are always with you.
5. With great joy I greet the pilgrims and visitors from German-speaking countries, especially you, dear young people, who have come to Rome for World Youth Day. And I very cordially invite you to the world youth meeting in Paris, where we will gather on 24 August 1997 for a liturgy together.
I cordially greet the young people from all the Slavic countries and Poland. I also invite all of you to this great meeting — World Youth Day in Paris —where the hospitable French Bishops are expecting you, as are your hospitable peers.
I wish everyone here and everyone in the homeland a blessed Holy Week and Easter Sunday. Praised be Jesus Christ!
6. Dear young people, on our journey of faith we have an incomparable guide: Mary. Let us entrust to her the itinerary for our meeting in Paris. May the Blessed Virgin help us all, especially young people, to answer generously Christ’s invitation: “Come and follow me”.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 16 March 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. In the Gospel for this Fifth Sunday of Lent, Jesus illustrates the meaning of his death by using the image of a grain of wheat which, by dying, bears much fruit (cf. Jn 12:24).
The idea for this reflection was offered by the fact that among the crowds who had come to meet him as he drew near to Jerusalem were some foreigners, Greeks to be precise, who told the Apostles of their desire to see him: “We wish to see Jesus” (Jn 12:21). With these words, in a way, they become the spokesmen of all humanity, highlighting the universal value of the salvation offered by Christ.
2. We wish to see Jesus! Even today this is the cry humanity raises to Christ’s disciples, asking them to show his divine face in their life and works. We accept this with trepidation, knowing, as the Apostle Paul says, that we carry a treasure in “earthen vessels” (2 Cor 4:7). We know that Christian history, though rich in holiness, also records great human frailty. The Council observed that it is often the inconsistency of believers which is an obstacle on the path of those who seek the Lord (cf. Gaudium et spes, n. 19). This is why the Church’s path towards the third millennium must be a serious journey of conversion, an effort of personal and community renewal in the light of the Gospel. The Great Jubilee of the Year 2000 must be this and only this. The more Christ can be seen in our lives, the more he will show that irresistible attraction which he himself foretold when he spoke of his death on the Cross: “I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all men to myself” (Jn 12:32).
3. Lord Jesus, give peace to the world!
Once again, dear brothers and sisters, I invite you to implore the Lord for peace in Albania.
The crisis shaking that nation, which has only recently emerged from a long period of inhuman dictatorship, has now extended to the whole territory, immersing those dear people in total insecurity.
For the good of Albania, I ask all those who have taken up arms to lay them down: destructive violence is certainly not a suitable way to resolve social problems. On the contrary, may each individual feel obliged to co-operate, with respect for persons and the law, in re-establishing trust between the citizens and their authorities. None of this can happen without public order.
Of course, these tragic events call for a response from all of Europe: it must help the authorities and people of Albania to build their country on the basis of democracy and on political and social dialogue.
May the Blessed Virgin Mary, Our Lady of Good Counsel, intercede for us so that the force of arms may not gain the advantage over peace, and indifference may not prevail over solidarity!
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
In a special way I now address the young people of Rome, inviting them to a meeting I have with them every year before Palm Sunday. Dear young people of Rome, I will be expecting you in large numbers next Thursday, at 5.00 p.m. in Paul VI Auditorium in the Vatican. During this meeting, entitled “Mission: pass the word”, I will give you Mark’s Gospel, so that it may become your plan of life, and so that you can go and bravely proclaim it to your peers. It will also be a good opportunity to prepare together for the great meeting with young people from all over the world to be held in Paris next August.
I also greet the many athletes involved today in the Rome Marathon: may this sporting event help to spread those values of love of sacrifice and solidarity which make the world more welcoming and human.
The Holy Father then said in Polish:
I now address the shipyard workers in Gdañsk. I wish to tell you that just as my heart and prayers were with you when you struggled for freedom, so now I am with you and your families in your struggle for survival.
I pray God that your efforts to preserve this symbol of the historic struggles and sacrifices made in defence of the dignity of man and the nation may be fruitful.
May Mary Help of Christians help all who are experiencing the crisis of an uncertain future.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 9 March 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Halfway through our Lenten journey, on this Fourth Sunday of Lent we are invited to meditate on a theme at the heart of the Christian message, that is, God’s great love for humanity. In today’s Gospel we read: “God so loved the world that he gave his only Son so that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life” (Jn 3:16).
Does contemporary man feel the need for this message? At first sight it would seem not, especially since in public expressions and in a certain prevalent culture, we can see the image of a humanity sure of itself, that willingly does without God and claims absolute freedom even from the moral law.
2. But when we look closely at the real situation of each person, forced to confront his own frailty and loneliness, we realize that, more than we think, hearts are weighed down by anguish, by worry about the future, by fear of sickness and death. This explains why so many seek an escape by sometimes taking deviant shortcuts, such as the blind alley of drugs or that of superstition and distressing magical rites.
Christianity offers no cheap comforts, demanding as it is in requiring an authentic faith and a strict moral life. But it gives us reason for hope by showing us God as a Father rich in mercy who has given us his Son, thereby revealing to us his immense love.
3. May Mary, Mother of mercy, put in our hearts the certainty that we are loved by God. May she be close to us when we feel alone, when we are tempted to give in to life’s difficulties. May she instil in us the sentiments of her divine Son, so that our Lenten journey may become an experience of forgiveness, acceptance and love.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
The past few days have brought reports of new and worrying situations.
From Zaire, we have had news of destruction and plundering. In the course of these events, the Church has also been profoundly affected: priests and religious have been killed and the faithful dispersed.
In our beloved neighbour, Albania, the situation has reached the tragic point of violence.
In Jerusalem, the Israeli authorities have made grave decisions which have caught the concerned attention of the international community. They could seriously harm the peace process and the spirit of trust so necessary if that process is to continue.
In Lima, Peru, we are still waiting for the release of the hostages held at the Japanese embassy. I feel particularly close to them and their loved ones.
These are painful situations which stem from intransigent and selfish attitudes. But everyone knows that only with respect for all and with constructive dialogue can dignified solutions be found for everyone, solutions which will further social peace and understanding among peoples.
I wish everyone a pleasant Sunday and a Lent of genuine interior renewal.
Pointing to the mountains surrounding Rome, the Holy Father said:
I wish to say that the parish I visited today is precisely there, near Castel Gandolfo, beneath those mountains. I wish you a pleasant Sunday and a good week. Praised be Jesus Christ!
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS - THIRD SUNDAY OF LENT
Sunday, 2 March 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. In the Gospel for this Third Sunday of Lent, St John tells us that, when Jesus found merchants and money-changers in the temple of Jerusalem, he made a whip of cords and drove them out with angry words: “Take these things away; you shall not make my Father’s house a house of trade” (Jn 2:16).
The Lord’s “severe” attitude might seem in contrast to the customary gentleness with which he approaches sinners, heals the sick and welcomes the little and the weak. To look closely, however, gentleness and severity are expressions of the same love which can be tender or demanding according to need. Genuine love is always accompanied by the truth.
Jesus’ zeal and love for the Father’s house certainly does not stop at a temple of stone. The whole world belongs to God and must not be profaned. By his prophetic act, mentioned in today’s Gospel text, Christ puts us on guard against the temptation to “trade” even in religion, by bending it to wordly or in any case extraneous interests.
Christ’s voice is also raised forcefully against the “temple merchants” of our age, against all who make the market their “religion”, to the point of trampling on the dignity of the human person with every sort of abuse, in the name of “the power-god, the money-god”. Let us think, for example, of the lack of respect for life, which is sometimes the object of dangerous experimentation; let us think of ecological pollution, the commercialization of sex, drug dealing and the exploitation of children and the poor.
2. The Gospel passage also has a more specific meaning, which refers to the mystery of Christ and announces the joy of Easter. Replying to those who asked him to confirm his prophecy with a sign, Jesus poses a sort of challenge: “Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up” (Jn 2:19). The same Evangelist notes that he was speaking of his body, alluding to his future Resurrection. Christ’s humanity is thus presented as the true “temple”, the living house of God. It would be “destroyed” on Golgotha, but immediately “rebuilt” in glory, to be the spiritual dwelling place of all who accept the Gospel message and let themselves be formed by the Spirit of God.
3. May the Blessed Virgin help us to accept her divine Son’s words. Mary’s mission is precisely to lead us to him, repeating to us the invitation she gave the servants in Cana: “Do whatever he tells you” (Jn 2:5). Let us listen to her motherly voice! Mary knows well that the demands of the Gospel, even when weighty and severe, are the secret of true freedom and of our authentic joy.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS - SECOND SUNDAY OF LENT
Sunday, 23 February 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. On this Second Sunday of Lent the liturgy presents us with the Transfiguration on Mount Tabor. It is the revelation of glory, which precedes the supreme trial of the Cross and anticipates the victory of the Resurrection.
Peter, James and John were witnesses of this extraordinary event. Today’s Gospel recounts that Jesus took them apart and led them with him up a high mountain (Mk 9:2).
The disciples’ ascent to Tabor spurs us to reflect on the penitential journey of these days. Lent is also an upward path. It is an invitation to rediscover the calming and regenerating silence of meditation. It is an effort to purify the heart of the sin that burdens it. It is certainly a demanding journey, but one that leads us towards a goal rich in beauty, splendour and joy.
2. In the Transfiguration the heavenly Father’s voice is heard: “This is my beloved Son; listen to him” (Mk 9:7). These words contain the whole programme for Lent: we must listen to Jesus. He reveals the Father to us, because, as the eternal Son, he is “the image of the invisible God” (Col 1:15). But at the same time, as true “Son of man”, he reveals what we are, he reveals man to man (cf. Gaudium et spes, n. 22). So let us not be afraid of Christ! In raising us to the heights of his divine life, he does not take away our humanity, but on the contrary, he humanizes us, giving our personal and social life full meaning. We are also urged to this ever more invigorating rediscovery of Christ by the prospect of the Great Jubilee, which in this first year of immediate preparation is principally centred on the contemplation of Christ: a contemplation that must be nourished by the Gospel and prayer, and must always be accompanied by authentic conversion and the constant rediscovery of love as the law of daily life.
3. Dear brothers and sisters, let us look to Mary, the Virgin who listens, who was always prepared to welcome and to treasure in her heart her divine Son’s every word (cf. Lk 2:51). The Gospel says of her: “blessed is she who believed that there would be a fulfilment of what was spoken to her from the Lord” (Lk 1:45). May the heavenly Mother of God help us enter into deep harmony with the Word of God so that Christ may become the light and guide of our whole life.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS - FIRST SUNDAY IN LENT
Sunday, 16 February 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. “Repent, and believe in the Gospel” (Mk 1:15). These words of Jesus set the tone for the whole of Lent, begun last Wednesday, Ash Wednesday.
The Church has set out for Easter. It is a journey of penitence, or of deep review of our life. We are called to examine our practical acceptance of the Gospel, knowing that even before it offers us a plan of life, it is news, indeed, as the very word “gospel” says, good news.
It is the news that God loves us and in his incarnate Son has shown us his solidarity, redeeming us from sin and death. Thus the Gospel is a message of liberation, joy and fullness of life. But whoever takes this message seriously must also make the commitment to a new life, inspired by Gospel values. It is a question of moving from a superficial life to deep interiority, from selfishness to love, of striving to live according to the model of Christ himself.
2. To help us in this effort, the Church points out to us a path that can be summarized in three words: prayer, fasting, almsgiving.
Prayer can have many expressions, personal and communal. But we must above all live its essence, listening to God who speaks to us, conversing with us as children in a “face to face” dialogue filled with trust and love.
In addition to being an external practice, fasting, which consists in the moderation of food and life-style, is a sincere effort to remove from our hearts all that is the result of sin and inclines us to evil.
Almsgiving, far from being reduced to an occasional offering of money, means assuming an attitude of sharing and acceptance. We only need to “open our eyes” to see beside us so many brothers and sisters who are suffering materially and spiritually. Thus Lent is a forceful invitation to solidarity.
3. Dear brothers and sisters, let us look to Mary in order to draw from her motherly gaze the courage of conversion. She knows our weakness, but she also knows the infinite resources of her divine Son's mercy. May the Blessed Virgin obtain for us the grace of entrusting ourselves to Christ, to continue joyfully on our Lenten journey and to review our life sincerely in the light of the Gospel.
After praying the Angelus the Holy Father said:
I address a cordial greeting to the pilgrims present and I wish everyone a Lent rich in Gospel fruit: mercy, conversion and solidarity with our brothers and sisters.
As is the custom, I will be engaged in Spiritual Exercises with those who work with me in the Roman Curia from this evening until next Saturday. I will be grateful to you, dear brothers and sisters, if you would make a particular mention of us in your prayer this week.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 9 February 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The Gospel often speaks of the cures worked by Jesus. The sick crowded round him and sought to touch him “for power came forth from him and healed them all” (Lk 6:19). I like to remember this shortly before the fifth World Day of the Sick, which will be celebrated this coming 11 February, the feast of Our Lady of Lourdes.
By healing the sick, Jesus shows that his gift of salvation is offered to the whole person, since he is the physician of soul and body. His compassion for those who are suffering spurs him to identify with them, as we read in the passage on the last judgement: “I was sick and you visited me” (Mt 25:36). It is this deep sharing that he asks of his disciples, when he entrusts them with the task of “healing the sick” (cf. Mt 10:8).
If we pray with faith, the Lord will not fail to work miracles of healing even today. His Providence, however, usually works through our responsible efforts and requires us to combat illness with all the resources of intellect, science and appropriate medical and social assistance.
2. Jesus’ love for the sick encourages us especially to put the resources of our heart into action. We know from experience that, when we are ill, we not only need adequate treatment, but human warmth. Unfortunately in contemporary society we often risk losing genuine contact with others. The pace of work, stress or family crisis makes it increasingly difficult for us to give one another fraternal support. It is the weakest who pay the price. Thus it can happen that the elderly who are no longer self-sufficient, defenceless children, the disabled, the severely handicapped and the terminally ill are sometimes seen as a burden and even an obstacle to be removed. On the other hand, walking at their side, dear brothers and sisters, helps build a society with a human face, enlivened by a deep sense of solidarity, where there is room and respect for all, especially the weakest.
3. Looking to Christ, physician of souls and bodies, we also meet the caring gaze of Mary, invoked by Christians as “Health of the sick”, Salus infirmorum. May the Blessed Virgin help us touch the healing hand of her divine Son, welcome the saving power of the Gospel and become ourselves a concrete witness to all who need us.
After greeting the pilgrims in various languages, the Holy Father added extemporaneously:
I wish you all a pleasant Sunday and good week, in which we will already begin Lent. The liturgy of ashes will be celebrated on Wednesday. Praised be Jesus Christ!
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS - WEEK OF THE FAMILY AND PRO-LIFE DAY
Sunday, 2 Feburary 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today, the feast of Candlemas, we recall the presentation of Jesus in the temple. Forty days after his birth, Mary and Joseph went to Jerusalem to offer him to the Lord as prescribed by the law of Moses. This is an episode that fits within the perspective of the People of Israel’s special consecration to God. But it also has a broader meaning: it recalls the gratitude we owe the Creator for every human life.
Life is a great gift of God, to be always welcomed with thanksgiving. If last Sunday I was concerned about the absence of values that threatens our society, today I would like forcefully to recall one of these basic values which must be absolutely recovered if we do not want to fall headlong into the abyss. I am referring to the sacred value of life, of every human life, from its origin in the mother's womb to its natural end.
I say this, recalling that in Italy today Pro-Life Day is being celebrated, a favourable opportunity for vigorously affirming that life, one’s own and that of others, cannot be disposed of at will: it belongs to the Author of life. Love inspires the culture of life, while selfishness inspires the culture of death. Choose life, says the Lord, that you and your descendants may live! (cf. Dt 30:19).
2. In the temple of Jerusalem, according to the Gospel account, Simeon, an elderly man of God, takes Jesus in his arms and recognizes that in him salvation has come for Israel and for all peoples: the Light of the Gentiles (cf. Lk 2:30:31).
The words of the holy old man express the longing that pervades human history. They express that waiting for God, that universal desire, unconscious perhaps, but ineffaceable, that he would come to meet us so that we might be able to share in his life. Simeon embodies the image of humanity striving to grasp that ray of light which renews all things, the seed of life that transforms all old age into everlasting youth.
3. In this context, the Day for Consecrated Life that we are celebrating today for the first time takes on a special significance. For some time the feast of the Presentation of Jesus in the Temple has brought together in diocesan communities the members of institutes of consecrated life and societies of apostolic life, to show God’s People the joy of unreserved commitment to the Lord and his kingdom. I wanted this experience to be extended to the whole Church, to give thanks to God for the great gift of consecrated life and to encourage ever greater gratitude and esteem for it. We are also spurred by the recently celebrated Synod of Bishops on the consecrated life, whose results are contained in the Post-Synodal Apostolic Exhortation Vita consecrata.
As I invite you to pray, dear friends, for our brothers and sisters who offer their witness to the poor, chaste and obedient Christ, my thoughts turn in a particular way to all those who have enriched their service to the Church with the sacrifice of their lives. I have just heard the news of the tragic death of Fr Guy Pinard, a Missionary of Africa, who was cruelly killed this morning as he celebrated Mass at his parish church in Ruhengeri, Rwanda. Let us pray to the Blessed Virgin for him, for his loved ones and for his people, that they may once again find peace in the respect for life.
  After praying the Angelus the Holy Father said:
Today the Diocese of Rome joins the Week of the Family with Pro-Life Day. Truly, married life, lived according to God’s plan, is itself a “gospel” which the world needs, just as it needs the witness offered by consecrated life. May all families, and in particular those in Rome, be leaders on the missionary journey of preparation for the Jubilee of the Year 2000.
I also express my deep satisfaction with the symposium on the theme, “The Genome and Aging: The Mystery of Man”, which was held in Rome these past few days. I hope that this interdisciplinary study will help to promote the dignity and rights of human life.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 26 January 1997
Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Many people, reflecting on the state of our world, show dismay and sometimes even anxiety. They are overwhelmed at the way individuals and groups behave, for it reveals a disconcerting absense of values. And our thoughts naturally turn to recent news reports that cause a chilling sense of emptiness in those who watch them attentively.
How can we fail to ask ourselves about their causes; how can we not feel the need for someone to help us decipher the mystery of life and enable us to look to the future with hope?
In the Bible, those who have this mission are prophets. They are people moved by the Spirit, who do not speak in their own name but in God’s.
To his contemporaries, Jesus also appeared as a prophet; impressed, they recognized him as a “prophet mighty in deed and word” (Lk 24:19). By his life and especially by his Death and Resurrection, he was accredited as the prophet par excellence, being the Son of God himself. This is what the Letter to the Hebrews says: “In many and various ways God spoke of old to our fathers by the prophets, but in these last days he has spoken to us by a Son” (Heb 1:1-2).
2. The mystery of the Prophet of Nazareth continues to call for our response. With the passing of the centuries and millenniums, his message, contained in the Gospels, is always timely. He himself said: “Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away” (Mk 13:31). In Jesus, his incarnate Son, God spoke the definitive word about man and about history, and the Church repeats it with ever new trust, knowing that it is the only word that can give man’s life its full meaning.
Jesus' prophetic message can often seem disturbing, but it is always salutary! Christ is a sign of contradiction (Lk 2:34), precisely because he touches the depths of the soul, he obliges those who hear him to question themselves, he demands conversion of heart.
3. May the journey towards the Jubilee be for believers a continual rediscovery of Christ. This is an urgent need which I have wished to emphasize by giving Mark’s Gospel to every Roman family. I hope that this initiative and others like it will increase in the Church.
May the Blessed Virgin help us to docilely hear the word of Jesus and to be its courageous, enthusiastic messengers and witnesses.
   After praying the Angelus the Holy Father said:
Today we are celebrating World Leprosy Day. Leprosy is a painful social scourge which, on the threshold of the Year 2000, has unfortunately not been eliminated yet. I would like to extend a special blessing to all those affected by this disease, and particularly those who live in situations of greater hardship. I greet the members of the Friends of Raoul Follereau Association, named after a great champion of the fight against leprosy who died 20 years ago, and I exhort them to continue in this humanitarian work which I hope will always be backed by the international community’s institutions.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 19 January 1997
  1. “On behalf of Christ, be reconciled to God” (2 Cor 5:20).
The pressing appeal for reconciliation, contained in these words of the Apostle Paul, is raised with force, and also with joy and hope, during the Week of Prayer for Christian Unity, which began yesterday and will close on Saturday, 25 January, the feast of the Conversion of St Paul. It is an appeal which serves as the main theme of the interdenominational gatherings planned for the various days of this week.
On the closing day, as is customary, I will preside at a solemn Eucharistic celebration in the Basilica of St Paul-Outside-the-Walls.
2. The theme of reconciliation, which is also the subject of this year’s Message for the World Day of Peace, has a twofold dimension: reconciliation with God, first of all, and then reconciliation with one’s brethren.
The true and ultimate reason for the division between Christians is human sin, which is a rebellion against God’s will. Precisely for this reason the Second Vatican Ecumenical Council stated: “There can be no ecumenism worthy of the name without interior conversion” (Unitatis redintegratio, n. 7). This is why a firm will to conform one’s life to the Gospel, a will sustained by constant prayer, is required of all who wish to be effective builders of unity.
The Christian community is on the way towards reconciliation and full communion in faith, sacraments and ministry. Today relations between Christians are in fact more fraternal. We note that there is better knowledge of one another, more attentive respect and increasing co-operation in strengthening understanding and brotherhood. Nevertheless, there remain doctrinal and practical differences which impede full communion. Dialogue must therefore be intensified and the commitment to prayer be further developed.
3. Dear brothers and sisters, in today’s world, as in every age, there are tensions and conflicts that show the need for profound reconciliation. As Christians, we are called by the Gospel to be peacemakers who proclaim the reconciliation Christ has brought to every man and to all men (cf. 2 Cor 5:14, 18).
This mission becomes more pressing as we head towards the Holy Door of the Year 2000, when we will celebrate the Great Jubilee. If we wish to be faithful to Jesus Christ, we must be thoroughly commited so that, at the dawn of the third millennium, we may find ourselves closer to one another; and everyone, together, closer to God. To lead us on this path, we now call upon the Mother of God, one of whose titles is “Hodegetria”, she who shows the Way.
  After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
We hope that this Week of Prayer for Christian Unity will be fruitful for the Church of Rome and for all Christendom. I wish you a pleasant week. Praised be Jesus Christ!
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS - FEAST OF THE BAPTISM OF CHRIST
Sunday, 12 January 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today, the feast of the Baptism of the Lord, I had the joy of baptizing 19 newborn babies in the Sistine Chapel. I extend an affectionate greeting and embrace to each of these children, as well as to their parents and relatives.
Today’s feast stresses how Jesus, at the beginning of his public life, wanted to receive the “baptism of conversion” (Lk 3:3), administered by John in the Jordan. This act, by which he, though innocent, showed his solidarity with sinners, became a moment of revelation. In fact, as he came out of the water, “immediately he saw the heavens opened and the Spirit descending upon him like a dove” (Mk 1:10). By this singular experience, Jesus is accredited as the Messiah awaited for centuries.
2. In the Jordan the voice of the Father resounds: “You are my beloved Son; with you I am well pleased” (Mk 1:11). These words shed light on the mystery of Jesus Christ: he is not only a “man of God”, like the prophets and saints, but the Son, the Only-Begotten One (Jn 1:18).
As the eternal Son, Jesus is consubstantial with the Father and the Holy Spirit and lives eternally in the Trinitarian communion of the one God. In the Incarnation, the Spirit of God completely fills his humanity. At his Baptism in the Jordan, the Spirit rests upon him to initiate him into the messianic ministry and to inaugurate that great “hour” of grace which will be completed by his Death and Resurrection. Indeed, Jesus Christ is the inexhaustble source of God’s Spirit for every man and woman who is open to his offer of salvation.
3. Dear brothers and sisters, today’s feast sheds light on one of the spiritual priorities of our journey towards the Holy Year: the need to have an ever deeper awareness of Baptism as “the basis of Christian living” (Tertio millennio adveniente, n. 41). Those who receive this sacrament are baptized in the Spirit of God, to become members of Christ and, with him and with our brothers and sisters, to form “one body” (1 Cor 12:13). An immense gift! We should celebrate the day of our Baptism as we do our birthday! But how many of the baptized are fully aware of what they have received? We must give a new impetus to catechesis, to rediscover this gift which also means taking on a great responsibility. May the Mother of God, the Mother of Jesus, accompany us on this demanding journey of reinvigorating our faith.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS - FEAST OF EPIPHANY
Monday, 6 January 1997
  1. “Nations shall come to your light, and kings to the brightness of your rising” (Is 60:3).
Today the Church celebrates the Solemnity of Epiphany, “a manifestation” of Christ to all peoples, represented by the Magi come from the East.
This feast helps us to discern the profound meaning of the Church’s universal mission, which can be understood as a movement of radiation: the radiation of Christ’s light, reflected on the face of his Mystical Body. Since this light is a light of love, truth and beauty, it is not forcibly imposed, but illumines minds and draws hearts.
By radiating this light, the Church obeys the mandate of the risen Christ: “Go therefore and make disciples of all nations” (Mt 28:19). It is a movement that spreads in all directions from the centre, from the Eucharist, through the witness and proclamation of the Gospel. This “going” is motivated by an inner urge of charity, without which it would produce no fruit.
The experience of the Magi is particularly eloquent in this regard: they move, guided by the light of a star that draws them to Christ. The Church must be like that star, that is, able to reflect Christ’s light, so that individuals and peoples in search of truth, justice and peace may come to Jesus, the one Saviour of the world.
2. This missionary task is entrusted to the entire People of God, but it is especially incumbent on those called to the apostolic ministry, that is, Bishops and priests. Today, the feast of Epiphany, in accordance with a well-established tradition I had the joy of consecrating 12 new Bishops.
Let us pray together for these new Pastors and for all the Bishops of the world, that their service to the Gospel may be ever more generous and faithful.
3. On this day a special thought goes to our brothers and sisters of the Christian East, many of whom are celebrating Christmas today. Before the icon of the Child Jesus, lovingly watched over by Mary and St Joseph, let us invoke the grace of deeper relations of understanding and communion between Christians of the East and West. Indeed, not only must different liturgical traditions not become an obstacle to unity, but they must be an incentive to reciprocal knowledge and enrichment.
We commend this hope to the Blessed Virgin, as we ask her in a special way to guide the Bishops ordained this morning in their pastoral ministry.
  After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
I warmly greet the pilgrims, especially those who have come from various countries to take part in the episcopal ordinations. Your presence today, dear friends, is an eloquent sign of your affection for these new Pastors and a pledge of the spiritual closeness with which you will always accompany them in their ministry.
In the light of Epiphany, I renew my fervent wishes for the year that has just begun, the first stage in the journey of immediate preparation for the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000. This year may every man and woman experience Christ’s redeeming and liberating presence in their own personal, family and social life.
I also address a cordial thought to the organizers and numerous participants in the traditional folkloristic procession, “Viva la Befana”, inspired this year by the history and culture of Ceccano in the province of Frosinone. I congratulate you for this lovely project, which is meant to pass on to the new generations the religious, historical and cultural values of today’s Solemnity of Epiphany. I gladly extend my greetings to the children, accompanied by their parents and grandparents, who have come from their ecological bicycle ride.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 5 January 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Reflection on the mystery of Jesus, which especially marks this first year of immediate preparation for the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000, goes well with the Christmas holidays. Continuing the meditation I began a few Sundays ago, today I would like to reflect on a title Jesus is given more than once in the Gospels. He is called “son of David”. Matthew’s Gospel opens precisely with these words: “The book of the genealogy of Jesus Christ, the son of David” (Mt 1:1).
We might say that it is a family title. Through Joseph, his putative father, Jesus is linked to the entire human chain which reaches from son to father back to King David. This genealogical relationship emphasizes the concreteness of the Incarnation: by becoming man, the Eternal Word of God fully entered the human family, putting himself in the lineage of a specific family tradition. In this way he also wanted to be one of us, experiencing that unique bond which, linking generations, enables each person to feel rooted not only in time and space, but also in a beneficial fabric of memories and affections.
2. However, in addition to this anthropological meaning, the title “son of David” also has a specific sense which casts light on God’s plan. In fact, it reminds us that the Christian event is the culmination of a salvation history which God has gradually brought about since the Old Testament, offering the Jewish people a special “covenant” and making them the bearer of saving promises which in Jesus of Nazareth would be fulfilled for all humanity. Therefore when his contemporaries call him “son of David”, they are recognizing that the ancient promises are fulfilled in him and proclaim the definitive realization of the messianic hope. Every man and woman can now draw from this hope, making his own the cry which is found on the lips of blind Bartimaeus in the Gospel: “Jesus, son of David, have mercy on me!” (Mk 10:47). By calling on the “son of David”, humanity can rediscover light for the gaze of its heart.
3. May Mary, the humble girl of Nazareth, who in giving birth to the Son of God introduced him into David's genealogy and into the entire human family, help us to grow in our understanding of how we are involved in this history of salvation. Let us be guided by her in the intimacy of her Holy Family where the seed of the new humanity is sown. At the beginning of this new year, may the Blessed Virgin bless all the families of the world, so that in Jesus they may recognize their true Saviour.
The Holy Father then appealed for the release of kidnap victims.
The Christmas holidays and the beginning of the new year offer families a long-awaited opportunity to come together, often after long periods and despite great distances. I cannot fail to think then of those families who are deprived of this joy because “someone is missing” from the list. Among those “missing”, I once again wish to remember those who have been kidnapped or have disappeared in mysterious circumstances, and to assure their loved ones of a particular mention in my prayer. May the mercy of Christ, born in human weakness, spur their kidnappers to make a gesture of human kindness: free these people. This gesture will fill those waiting for them with joy, but will especially give peace to the kidnappers themselves.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Solemnity of Mary, Mother of God
World Peace Day
Wednesday, 1 January 1997
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. On this first day of the year, I would like to extend my best wishes for serenity and peace to all families, peoples and persons of goodwill. It is a wish that springs from my heart, but above all it rests on the certainty that, with the passing of time, God remains faithful to his love. Yes, God loves us! He loves us with a boundless love! We are also reminded of this by today’s liturgical solemnity which has us invoke the Blessed Virgin with the title of “Mother of God”. What does proclaiming Mary “Mother of God” mean? It means recognizing that Jesus, the fruit of her womb, is the Son of God, consubstantial with the Father and begotten of him in eternity. A great mystery, a mystery of love! He, the Only-Begotten Son of the Father (Jn 1:14), became one of us. In this way “eternity entered into time” (Tertio millennio adveniente, n. 9), and the passing of years, of centuries and millenniums, is no longer a blind journey towards the unknown but a journeying to him, the fullness of time (cf. Gal 4:4) and the goal of history.
2. In honouring the Blessed Virgin as the Mother of God, we also wish to stress that Jesus, the eternal Word made flesh, is true “Son of Mary”. She transmitted full humanity to him. She served as his mother and teacher, imbuing him with the gentle, delicate strength of her temperament and the riches of her sensitivity. A marvellous exchange of gifts: Mary who, as a creature, is first of all the disciple of Christ and is redeemed by him, at the same time was chosen as his Mother to shape his humanity. Thus the deep meaning of Christmas is fulfilled in the relationship between Mary and Jesus: God made himself like us, so that we might in some way become like him!
3. Precisely in virtue of this mystery of love I did not hesitate to focus my message for this first day of the year, when the World Day of Peace is celebrated, on a theme as demanding as it is vital: “offer forgiveness and receive peace”. I know well that it is hard, and sometimes even appears to be impossible to forgive, but it is the only way, because all revenge and all violence give rise to further revenge and violence. It is certainly less difficult to forgive when one is aware that God never tires of loving and forgiving us. Who does not need God’s forgiveness? May the Blessed Virgin, Mother of God, encourage us to begin this new year with an act of love, if necessary, of reconciliation, and the resolution to contribute to building a better world under the banner of justice and peace. Let us never forget that everything passes, and only the eternal can fill the heart.
To the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors the Holy Father said:
To all the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors I wish a very Happy New Year filled with God’s blessings of joy and peace. May the Blessed Virgin Mary accompany you and your families with her prayers and lead you ever nearer to Jesus her Divine Son.
  © Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 27 December 1998 
  1. Today, in the joyful atmosphere of Christmas, the Church, reliving with fresh wonder the mystery of Emmanuel, God-with-us, leads us to contemplate the Holy Family of Nazareth. From contemplation of this admirable model, the Church draws the values to hold up to the women and men of all times and all cultures.
"O Family of Nazareth, the living image of God's Church!". With these words, the Christian community recognizes in the family communion of Jesus, Mary and Joseph an authentic "rule of life": the Church will be more capable of achieving the "covenant of love" which is manifest in the Holy Family, the better she fulfils her mission to be a leaven, so that "in [Christ] men might form one family" (Ad gentes, n. 1).
2. A ray of hope from the Holy Family also shines on the reality of families today. Aware of this, the Pontifical Council for the Family is now working to prepare the third World Meeting of Families, which will be held in Rome on 14 and 15 October in the year 2000, in the context of the Great Jubilee. The preparation is focused on the motto: "Children, the springtime of the family and of society". The previous meeting was held in Rio de Janeiro, and the first, four years ago, in Rome. The next one will be the third.
Yes, precisely in Nazareth the springtime of the human life of the Son of God began the very moment he was conceived in the Virgin Mary's womb by the power of the Holy Spirit. Jesus spent his childhood between the hospitable walls of the House of Nazareth where he "increased in wisdom and in stature, and in favour with God and man" (Lk 2:52).
3. Thus the mystery of Nazareth teaches every family to beget and raise its own children, marvellously co-operating with the Creator's work and giving the world, in every child, a new smile.
It is in united families that children grow up and experience the most important, the richest moments of gratuitous love, fidelity, mutual respect and the defence of life.
May today's families look to the Family of Nazareth in order to draw the appropriate criteria for life's daily choices from the example of Mary and Joseph, lovingly dedicated to the care of the incarnate Word! In the light of the teaching learned at this incomparable school, every family will be able to find its way on the path towards the fulfilment of God's plan.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
On the occasion of the Feast of the Holy Family, I would like to point out an interesting social project called: "Set an extra place at the table". People who are lonely, in difficulty or homeless are invited on New Year's Eve by host families who open the doors of their homes to them. Promoted by the Milan Observatory, this initiative has also spread to Rome and elsewhere: I warmly hope that the number of those who adopt it will increase, not only to offer those in need a more peaceful day, but in this way to start a friendship and fruitful collaboration with them.
I now greet the altar servers of St Laurence Parish in Chiavenna and the Confraternity of Our Lady of Grace in Artena, who have accompanied a group of handicapped children here.
I wish everyone a good Sunday and a serene continuation of their Christmas holidays. Speaking extemporaneously, the Holy Father then greeted the Lebanese and families:
Long live Lebanon!
My best wishes to all the families of Castel Gandolfo, Rome and the whole world. Enjoy the rest of the day! Praised be Jesus Christ.
  © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Feast of St Stephen
Saturday, 26 December 1998 
     Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. "O, that you would rend the heavens!": this invocation accompanied us during the season of Advent. On the Holy Night, the heavens opened and Emmanuel came among us: in the incarnate Word at last we can contemplate the merciful face of our heavenly Father.
Mary and Joseph contemplated him first, together with the shepherds and later the Magi, the Apostles and all those who met him on the roads of Galilee and Judea.
After them, the saints of every age in their faith saw "the heavens rent". The first of the martyrs is St Stephen, whose feast we are celebrating today. He gave his life as a witness of his loyalty to the Redeemer. In the darkness of persecution, the Lord appeared to him like the radiant star which, by overcoming the shadow of evil, rekindles hope and proclaims the new dawn: eternal life.
2. Thus the memory of the Protomartyr Stephen in a certain sense extends the joy of Christmas. His courageous and faithful option for Jesus encourages us to bear a consistent witness to the Gospel, as did he who, filled with the Holy Spirit, followed Christ and imitated him in life and death. May his example sustain in particular those who, today too, are subjected to harsh trials because of their faith, so that they will never lack the courage to give the Lord their total support.
May the Virgin Mary, a silent witness of the mystery of the Incarnation and a constant support of the saints and martyrs, intercede for us so that we can place at the centre of our lives Jesus Christ, whom during these days we contemplate in the simplicity and humility of the crib.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus and greeting the newly ordained priests of the Legionaries of Christ and members of the Regnum Christi Movement, the Holy Father said:
Here we are in Castel Gandolfo. Happy Christmas to the inhabitants of Castel Gandolfo and to all the faithul of Albano. Enjoy the rest of the day. Praised be Jesus Christ.
  © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 20 December 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. In a few days it will be Christmas. Families are busy with preparations. The crib, being set up in this square too, and the tree, pointing to heaven and already decorated with strands of light, remind us of the approach of this feast, which is so rich in sentiment and inspiration. As I offer you my most cordial greetings, I urge everyone not to stop at the external aspect of Christmas, reducing it to a folkloric festival, but to rediscover its profound truth, that of the Son who came among us in the humility of our flesh. We must renew within ourselves that attitude of wonder and astonished admiration which the Virgin Mary experienced in the presence of this Mystery. May Christmas bring everyone to meet God and awaken in all hearts feelings of mutual forgiveness and fraternal solidarity.
2. The Christmas atmosphere causes us even deeper suffering over what is happening in these days to the Iraqi people, to whose tragedy no one can be indifferent.
My profound sorrow for the situation of that people is combined with deep distress at seeing how often hopes in the effectiveness and force of international law and in the organizations called to guarantee its application are disappointed.
I repeat once again: war has never been and will never be an appropriate way to solve problems between nations!
More than ever, then, it is the Iraqi people who must be the chief concern of those in Iraq and elsewhere who have the obligation to resolve this crisis. To everyone I make a heartfelt appeal that human solidarity and respect for the international order will prevail.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus the Holy Father said:
I cordially greet the pilgrims from Bad Säckingen who have donated this year’s Christmas tree. You give everyone great joy with this Black Forest firtree. God’s blessing to your compatriots and a Happy Christmas!
I wish everyone a pleasant Sunday and a fervent preparation for Christmas.
  © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday 13 December 1998
    Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. Continuing our reflection on the Encyclical Fides et ratio, today I would like to stress the existence of truth as the common presupposition of faith and reason. Actually, when man asks questions, he does so in the desire and hope of finding an answer to them.
Sometimes the truth is difficult to seek, as though it were never possessed once and for all, and the experience of error prompts us to be humble and tolerant. At the same time, however, there is no reason for a scepticism that radically questions the very possibility of the human being attaining truth. Where scepticism takes root, sound criteria of judgement and discernment fail, and human existence is prey to the emotions and in danger of lacking foundation.
2. Really, if man experiences difficulty in reaching truth and certitude about many things, he notices however that there are fundamental realities and principles on which there is full and universal certitude.
These truths are the very condition for thought, existence and society. They enable us to communicate, to search, to recognize our mistakes, to live together and to love.
Empirical science itself proves the existence of truth. It appears as a process marked by partial achievements and the gradual overcoming of errors. For this very reason all genuine scientific knowledge is a step towards the fullness of truth. This applies to other areas of knowledge as well. Therefore, in the Encyclical Fides et ratio I pointed out a core of philosophical insight within the history of thought as a whole, which "may be judged a kind of spiritual heritage of humanity" (Fides et ratio, n. 4).
For its part, although the Revelation that comes from on high and has its fullness in Christ leads us to a deeper knowledge of the mystery of God and his saving plan, it is never opposed to the truths already attained by the light of reason; rather it verifies them, purifies them and strengthens them.
3. Dear brothers and sisters, let us entrust to the Blessed Virgin those who are going through periods of confusion and doubt, which make them feel there are no certitudes or hope. At the same time, let us learn humility and boldness from Mary so that we can always advance towards the truth, seeking it and bearing witness to it with all our strength. May she help us understand that the search for truth, in the last analysis, is a search for God.
After reciting the Angelus, the Holy Father spoke of some forthcoming events in Rome and blessed the figures of the Child Jesus that Italian children would put in their cribs at home.
Now I would like to mention some activities that concern the Christian community in Rome.
First of all, today we are celebrating the day for the building of new churches on the city's outskirts. Parishes are not only places of worship but are often buildings of artistic beauty, meeting places and centres for aiding so many social needs in the area. I hope that believers and all Romans will show more and more generous solidarity so that an adequate number of parish facilities can be provided for the outlying neighbourhoods.
Next Tuesday, at 5.30 p.m., I will celebrate Holy Mass in the Vatican Basilica for the city's university students; this has now become a tradition as Christmas approaches. I invite all the teachers and students to this event, which this year has a very special meaning because it is part of the City Mission, which at this stage is directed to the milieus of study and work.
Next I would like to greet the many children in the square with their statues of the Child Jesus and their cribs. Dear friends, I cordially bless the "Bambinelli" you have brought with you. They will carry the Christmas message of peace to your families, your schools and your places of recreation.
The crib they are building here in the square makes us think of Greccio, where St Francis of Assisi set up the first Nativity scene. Today a "Peace Appeal" is being addressed to the world from that town and I gladly support it.
Lastly, I greet all the pilgrims and hope that everyone enters into the Christmas novena, which starts next Wednesday, 16 December, with devout recollection.
A pleasant Sunday to all.
The Special Assembly for Oceania of the Synod of Bishops concluded yesterday. We are grateful for this great experience of the Church and we wish all our Brother Bishops a safe return to their homes, their countries, their islands.
May the Lord's blessing go with them and may they have a happy Christmas.
Again I wish everyone a pleasant Sunday and a good week. Praised be Jesus Christ!
   © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Tuesday, 8 December 1998
    1. “Tota pulchra es Maria!”. With these words the Church addresses the Mother of Christ on today’s Solemnity of the Immaculate Conception. Mary is the woman preserved from original sin, envisaged and chosen by the Father to become the Mother of the Saviour. In giving a human face to the Son of God, who is “the splendour of the Father’s glory” (St Ambrose), the Blessed Virgin saw shining upon her, as no other creature, the face of the Father rich in grace and mercy.
Thus the Immaculate Conception is an extraordinary gift and an ineffable privilege! As a result, Our Lady, totally preserved from the slavery of evil and the object of God's special favour, anticipates in her life the path to be taken by the redeemed, the people saved by Christ.
2. This important Marian feast occurs during Advent, a season of watchful and prayerful preparation for Christmas. She who knew better than anyone how to wait attentively for the Lord guides us and shows us how to make more vital and active our journey to the Holy Night of Bethlehem. With her, we spend these weeks in prayer and, guided by her bright star, hasten to make the spiritual journey that will lead us to celebrate the mystery of the Incarnation with greater intensity.
This year, Advent brings us into the last year of preparation for the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000. This is an additional reason to intensify our efforts to make our expectation of the Redeemer’s coming more generous and attentive.
3. The 10th Assembly of Italian Catholic Action, to commemorate the 130th anniversary of its foundation and the 30th of its statutes revised after the Second Vatican Council, was concluded a short time ago with the Holy Eucharist I celebrated in St Peter’s Basilica.
As happens every year, on this day the members of Italian Catholic Action renew their loyalty and put their Christian commitment in the hands of the Blessed Virgin, entrusting to her their projects and apostolic activities. May the holy Mother of the Redeemer always protect this great ecclesial association and make fruitful its work during these days on the theme: “Witnesses of hope in the human city”.
May Mary also watch with constant and motherly care over Rome, which this afternoon in Piazza di Spagna will pay her its traditional homage, as it does every year. I too, God willing, will join this pilgrimage, which is an inspiring moment of Marian devotion for the Roman people. Together, then, we will take another step on the spiritual journey to the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000.
May Mary, the Immaculate Virgin, guide and protect us always!
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
I greet the Italian-speaking pilgrims, particularly the members of the Pontifical Academy of the Immaculate, accompanied by Cardinal Andrzej M. Deskur: the Immaculate will triumph because Christ has triumphed in her.
I also greet the group from the Work of the Church. May the Immaculate Virgin help everyone to be faithful witnesses to the Gospel.
The last word belongs to Italian Catholic Action. I greet all the groups, including Rome's Catholic Action. I also greet the residents of the Alban Hills. Today we can clearly see Castel Gandolfo and also Monte Cavo. Praised be Jesus Christ.
  © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 6 December 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. On 15 October last the Encyclical Fides et ratio was published. It is addressed to the Bishops of the Catholic Church and deals with themes that are of particular interest to those involved in philosophy and theology. But the basic theme concerns everyone. For this reason, today and on the Sundays to come I will consider several of its important aspects.
The Encyclical, as you know, concerns the relationship between faith and reason. But in the last analysis, what is at stake is truth, which both are called to serve.
In this regard, we must first of all stress that the search for truth represents an inescapable and defining requirement of the human being.
As long as he has had the use of reason, man has been a being who questions himself. We know how many "whys" sometimes serious and embarrassing are asked by children. Some questions arise from curiosity or the need to solve specific problems. The deeper questions stem from the wonder man experiences at the mystery of himself and of all creation. Often they come from pain. They always express an awareness of his own limits and the effort to overcome them.
2. We live in an era when the quantity and speed of information are increasing phenomenally. The risk is that the dizzying flow of news about so many things will stifle questions about the crucial issues of life. "Who am I? Where have I come from and where am I going? Why is there evil? What is there after this life?" (Fides et ratio, n. 1). These questions have always been at the centre of attention for philosophy and religion: in this regard we recall the famous admonition "Know yourself", carved on the temple portal at Delphi.
In fact, it is precisely when he looks ardently and in the right direction for the answer to these fundamental questions that the human being shows he is "wise". Philosophy, whose precise meaning is "love of wisdom", is rooted in this fundamental quest. Faith, for its part, does not fear but rather encourages this exercise of reason. I wrote in the Introduction to the Encyclical: "Faith and reason are like two wings on which the human spirit rises to the contemplation of truth".
3. Dear brothers and sisters, let us look to Blessed Mary, the sublime model of the search for truth. Mother of the One who is wisdom itself, her life was a pilgrimage from one demanding question to another, through which her reason was opened to the light of faith. May she help us not to avoid the questions that really matter, those decisive for our life. After reciting the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted some of the groups in St Peter's Square.
I extend a cordial greeting to the Italian-speaking pilgrims, particularly those attending the conference organized by the Sisters of the Holy Family of Spoleto on the spirituality of their founder, Bl. Pietro Bonilli. I hope that there will be more and more lay people who will be inspired, like Fr Bonilli, by Holy Family of Nazareth and devote themselves with apostolic spirit to fostering authentic Christian families.
I also greet the volunteers from the Father Kolbe Institute of the Immaculate in Bari and the young people from the volunteer associations of Our Lady of Sorrows Parish in Benevento.
I wish you all a pleasant Sunday.
I welcome the group of Filipino pilgrims here today. In recent days we have all been deeply saddened by news of the fire in Manila which caused many victims, including young children. I renew the assurance of my prayers for the survivors and all affected by this tragedy.
Upon all the English-speaking visitors I invoke the blessings of almighty God.
    © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 22 November 1998
  1. Today, the last Sunday of the liturgical year, we celebrate the Solemnity of Our Lord Jesus Christ, King of the Universe. As the year draws to a close, the Church professes that the One who was crucified and rose again is the Lord of the world and of history: Easter casts its light on the whole cosmos and illumines it. It is the light of love and truth, which redeems the universe from death caused by sin, and renews the plan of creation, so that all things may acquire their full meaning and be reconciled with God and with one another.
While we are pilgrims here on earth, we look towards heaven, our definitive homeland. To reach the fulfilment of the divine kingdom, the Gospel urges us not to follow the “prince of this world” (Jn 12:31; 16:11), who sows division and scandal, but to remain faithful and humble in following Christ. He leads us to the kingdom of peace and justice, where God will be all in all.
2. The Church is an anticipation in history of God’s kingdom and shows this by being catholic, that is, universal. This morning in St Peter’s Basilica a solemn Eucharist has opened the Special Assembly for Oceania of the Synod of Bishops, whose theme is “Jesus Christ: Walking His Way, Telling His Truth and Living His Life”. The Synod marks a further stage on the Church’s journey: she gives thanks for the gift of the Gospel to all peoples and approaches the third millennium by committing herself with renewed vigour to the task of proclaiming it to the world. I give a most cordial welcome to all the Bishops of Oceania who have come to Rome from afar to take part, with the other Synod Fathers, in the work of this assembly.
I also ask of you, here present, and the entire People of God to pray for this important ecclesial event, which we hope will bear fruits of spiritual renewal not only for the communities of the Oceanian continent, but for all believers throughout the world.
3. By their witness, in fact, all the faithful have a leading role in the universal mission of serving the kingdom of God. In a special way, priests are sent to spread to every corner of the world the Good News of God’s love.
Dear brothers and sisters, remembering that today Rome is celebrating Seminary Day, I invite you to offer a special prayer to the Lord for priestly vocations. Jesus said to pray the Father to send workers into the harvest: we do this by invoking the intercession of Blessed Mary, Queen of Apostles, so that in Rome, in Italy and throughout the world, many holy vocations will mature in the image of the Good Shepherd.
© Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 15 November 1998
  1. For some days I have been thinking intensely of the Middle East region, particularly Iraq, which last week attracted fresh attention and the concern of nations in every part of the world. I hope with all my heart that a just and peaceful solution can be reached. Above all, I hope that a people so harshly tried may be spared further suffering and sorrow.
I invite everyone to beseech the Lord to enlighten the minds and hearts of leaders, so that they will continue to use diplomatic means and dialogue to resolve this serious crisis.
2. Today National Migration Day is being celebrated in Italy, with the theme: “Migration from Babel to Pentecost: Unity in the Spirit”.
“Babel” is the symbol of pride, which seeks arrogantly to impose the Promethean plan of building one people on the basis of one culture, without God. “Pentecost”, on the other hand, is the event which re-establishes God's plan, giving voice and legitimacy to ethnic and cultural pluralism, and recognizing the right of the individual and of various ethnic groups to “proclaim in their own tongues the mighty works of God”. May today’s event help believers to adopt an increasingly friendly and open attitude to migrants.
3. Today in many European countries is also the day to remember the victims of road accidents. While I pray to the Lord for those who have died in such tragic circumstances, I would like to express my spiritual closeness to their families and to the survivors, who in many cases are deeply affected in body and spirit. I firmly hope that this day will help motorists always to behave responsibly, with respect for life and for the norms of highway safety.
4. Lastly, in wishing everyone a good week, I would like to mention that next Saturday, 21 November, the Feast of the Presentation of Mary in the Temple, we will celebrate the “Pro Orantibus” day, dedicated to the spiritual and material support of cloistered monasteries, especially those in situations of hardship or difficulty.
In expressing deep gratitude to our cloistered sisters for their precious witness to the values of contemplative life, we entrust their spiritual journey to the intercession of the Blessed Virgin, the sublime model of recollection and prayer for all the faithful in every state of life.
After the recitation of the Angelus the Holy Father greeted various pilgrim groups in Italian and Polish.
I greet the Neocatechumenal communities from the Parishes of the Holy Trinity and St Lucy in Brindisi, St Aloysius Gonzaga Parish in Otuni and St Irene’s Parish in Veglie. During their pilgrimage to the Holy House of Loreto they have wished to visit the tombs of the Apostles here in Rome.
I greet the Neocatechumenal communities from St Barbara’s Church in Kraków and St Anne’s Parish in Piaseczno, the pilgrims from Male Ciche and Wiktorówki, the Catholic secondary school in Mosina, near Poznañ, and the railway workers from Radom and Kielce. May your stay in the Eternal City strengthen your faith! God bless you!
  © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 8 November 1998
    1. Today in Italy the traditional Day of Thanksgiving is being celebrated, when especially farmers as well as other workers give thanks to God for his providence.
This year too I would like to express my cordial closeness on this significant occasion, hoping — as the Italian Bishops wrote in their Message — that it will help people rediscover “the authentic meaning of labour and the deep motive of praise and thanksgiving to God, who continues to work also through the hands and mind of every man and every woman” (n. 1).
I impart a special blessing today to all farmers and to every worker, man and woman, especially those who are going through personal or family difficulties.
2. I would also like to send a word of comfort to the peoples of Central America, where entire countries have been struck by a terrible natural disaster. As I pray for the repose of the souls of the enormous number of victims, I renew my invitation to everyone to be generous to the survivors who are currently facing immense problems.
Unfortunately other sorrowful events, this time caused by human violence, risk frustrating the efforts of all who yearn for a better world. I am referring in particular to the Middle Eastern region, where another attack in the centre of Jerusalem has awoken new fears for peace just when there were renewed hopes of resuming talks after the recent agreement, the result of arduous and courageous negotiations, had been concluded between the parties concerned.
3. In addition, in some areas of the Republic of the Congo armed conflicts continue to break out, plunging local peoples into an atmosphere of total insecurity and causing damage to the Catholic Church’s religious personnel and works.
I express a heartfelt wish that everyone will show human solidarity and abandon recourse to violence which never leads to solutions worthy of man.
I entrust this wish to the intercession of the Blessed Virgin, asking her to comfort those who are suffering and to strengthen the intentions of persons of goodwill.
    © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Solemnity of All Saints
Sunday, 1 November 1998
  1. Today’s Solemnity of All Saints has a special meaning during the preparation for the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000: the primary objective of that historic event is to reinvigorate the faith and witness of Christians. The saints are those who in every age knew how courageouly to live their faith by bearing witness to Christ without surrender or compromise.
“Blessed are the poor in spirit, ... the meek, ... the pure of heart, ... the peacemakers, ... those who are persecuted for righteousness’ sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven” (Mt 5:3-10). So today’s liturgy tells us again, pointing to those who “have come out of the great tribulation; they have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb” (Rv 7:14), drawing abundantly from the treasures of Redemption. Now they go before us in the joy of the heavenly liturgy. They are models for us and help us by their constant intercession, offering us countless reflections of that light of grace which is the fruit of the supreme mystery of the Incarnation.
2. In the liturgical year today’s solemnity is closely connected with the Commemoration of All the Faithful Departed, which we will celebrate tomorrow. Our thoughts turn to cemeteries throughout the world where lie the mortal remains of those who have preceded us. Our memory becomes even more vivid when we think of our own dear ones, who loved us and gave us life. No less significant is the memory of those who were victims of violence and war, as well as those who sacrificed their lives in order to remain faithful to Christ to the very end, or who died while they were generously serving their brothers and sisters. We wish especially to recall those who have left us this year and to pray for them.
If, on the one hand, the Church, a pilgrim through history, is gladdened by the intercession of the saints and blesseds who support her in the task of proclaiming the Death and Resurrection of Jesus, on the other, she shares the sadness of her children who are suffering the loss of their loved ones and she shows them the horizon of Christian hope, the prospect of eternal life. In these two closely connected observances, joy and grief find a synthesis that has its foundation and consoling certitude in Christ.
3. Let us look to Mary, who, endowed with the “gift of sublime grace, far surpasses all creatures, both in heaven and on earth” (Lumen gentium, n. 53). To her we commend our departed loved ones; to her we present our deep, heartfelt desire to strive for holiness with all our strength.
Mary, Queen of All Saints, pray for us!
  © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 25 October 1998
  At the end of this solemn liturgical celebration, I am pleased to greet all of you, dear pilgrims, who have come from various countries to honour the new blesseds. Let us now turn our gaze to Mary most holy, whom our brothers and sister tenderly loved and faithfully imitated. Devotion to the Virgin Mother of God and the recitation of the Rosary held a special place in their lives.
The month of October is the month of Mary, the month of the Rosary. This simple, profound prayer, dear to individuals and to families, was once widely recited by the Christian people. How good it would be if the Rosary were rediscovered and appreciated today, especially in families! It helps us reflect on the life of Christ and the mysteries of salvation; by repeated invocation of the Blessed Virgin, it dispels the seeds of family disintegration; it is a sure bond of communion and peace.
I urge everyone, especially Christian families, to find in the Holy Rosary a daily strength and support for walking the path of fidelity.
May Mary, Queen of the Holy Rosary and of All Saints, help us to pursue our mission as believers without wavering. Let us turn to her with filial abandonment, as did the new blesseds whom we contemplate today in heavenly glory. May Our Lady especially support families, so that they can accept the Gospel with integrity and live it in their daily lives.
I greet the French-speaking pilgrims present at the beatification, particularly those from Brittany, the native region of Mother Theodore Guérin. I invite them to keep alive the missionary spirit that motivated the new blessed. I grant my Apostolic Blessing to everyone.
I greet the English-speaking pilgrims present here in St Peter’s Square to honour the four new beati, and I welcome in particular the visitors from the United States accompanying the Sisters of Providence. May the example of these faithful witnesses to Christ inspire us all to ever greater fidelity. God bless you all!
I affectionately greet the Spanish and Latin American Bishops and faithful present here, as well as the Daughters of the Divine Shepherdess and the members of the great Calasanctian family. The beatification of Fr Faustino Míguez today gladdens the way of the Church, our Mother and Teacher. As a model Christian educator, he gives a fresh impulse to the Gospel commitment of Catholic colleges on the threshold of the third millennium.
My affectionate greeting also goes to the Brazilians who have come for the beatification of Friar Galvão. May this festive day remind you that the Pope is with you in his prayers and asks God, through the intercession of Our Lady of the Apparition, for peace and harmony for every Brazilian family. God bless you!
  © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 18 October 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. Today we are celebrating World Mission Sunday. We did the same 20 years ago at the beginning of my Petrine ministry. It seems a significant coincidence, when I think of the missionary spirit that motivates my apostolic efforts and is particularly expressed in the many journeys I have been able to  make, in order to cry out to all, in every corner of the world: “Open the doors to Christ!”. Today my thoughts turn in particular to the missionaries “ad gentes”, who bring this message so lovingly to mission countries, often in conditions of hardship, sometimes at the cost of their life. We thank them! May they feel, and not just today, the loving support and prayers of the whole Church.
2. The missionary spirit also pervades the Encyclical Fides et ratio, published last Thursday, which I intend to discuss later. In this Encyclical, as you know, I address the problem of the relationship between philosophy and theology, stressing that faith and reason are like “two wings on which the human spirit rises to the contemplation of truth” (n. 1). Woe to humanity should it lose the meaning of truth, the courage to seek it, the confidence of finding it. Not only would faith be compromised, but the meaning of life itself.
I entrust the reception of this Encyclical to the intercession of the Blessed Virgin, “Seat of Wisdom”. May we also be aided by St Thérèse of Lisieux, whom I declared a “doctor of the Church” exactly one year ago, and Edith Stein, the holy “philosopher”, whom I had the joy of canonizing last Sunday.
I thank the French-speaking people who wished to attend this jubilee celebration. I encourage them to intensify their spiritual journey in order to offer their lives as an act of praise to God and to serve the Lord and his Church by bearing witness to him in their work and in every aspect of their lives.
I warmly greet the English-speaking visitors present, and in particular the group from the new Diocese of Vasai in India. I express my heartfelt thanks to all who have prayed for me on my 20th anniversary, and to those who have sent messages of support and goodwill. In gratitude, I remember everyone in my daily prayers! May God send his peace upon us and fill our hearts with his joy!
Dear brothers and sisters, I look back with great gratitude to God on the past 20 years of my Pontificate, which I have placed under the protection of the Virgin Mary. I earnestly ask you to pray that God will give me the strength of his Spirit so that I can fulfil, in a way pleasing to him, the ministry entrusted to me. I gladly impart my Apostolic Blessing to you and your loved ones.
I affectionately greet all the Spanish and Latin American pilgrims. I thank you for your presence and, most especially, for your prayers for me and my ministry as Successor of the Apostle Peter.
I warmly great my compatriots, those present and those who have spiritually joined in our prayer of thanksgiving. May God reward you for the kindness I have continually experienced over the last 20 years. You have shown me this kindness in a particular way over the last few days. Last Friday was moving proof of this. Greetings, assurances of prayer, and best wishes have come from every corner of the world. Thanks for everything!
I commend all my compatriots, at home and abroad, to God’s providence, by whose inscrutable will I have been entrusted with the Petrine ministry. On the threshold of the third millennium I entrust the future of our homeland and of the Church in Poland to the Queen of Jasna Góra. I cordially bless you all.
   © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 11 October 1998
    We conclude this solemn celebration by praying the Angelus. Let us look at Our Lady with the eyes of the new saint, who, in contemplating the mystery of the presentation in the temple, remarked: “When the Virgin Mary brought the Child to the temple, she received the prophecy that a sword would pierce her soul.... It is the prediction of the Passion, of the struggle between light and darkness, which already appeared before the crib!”.
St Teresa Benedicta of the Cross understood that crib and Cross were closely connected. This inner awareness allowed her to become deeply attuned to the Blessed Virgin. She wrote of her: “Praying before God, loving him with all her heart, imploring his grace for her sinful people by offering herself in reparation for this people, and, as the servant of the Lord, being attentive to every one of his signs: this was her life”. Edith Stein, also a daughter of the Jewish people, spoke of Mary and, almost without realizing it, mapped out the plan of her own life decision.
Let us ask the new saint to intercede for us with the Blessed Virgin, so that we can all respond generously to our vocation.
I extend a special greeting to the many German-speaking pilgrims. I also greet those who have come from the Netherlands. The new saint, Sr Teresa Benedicta of the Cross, never tired of seeking the truth. I ask you to follow the way of the truth. Only in the truth will your personal life and society have a solid foundation.
Edith Stein stands out as a beacon which casts its light amid the terrible darkness which has marred this century. In the martyr, St Teresa Benedicta of the Cross, so many differences meet and are resolved in peace. I invoke her intercession upon all of you who have come from different parts of the world to honour her and the witness which she bore. To her prayers before God I entrust all who suffer for the sake of justice and human dignity. God bless you all.
I greet you, dear French-speaking pilgrims who are attending the canonization of Edith Stein. May the new saint be an example for you of the spiritual and intellectual life! May she help you to seek God in yourselves and to seek yourselves in God, in order to find the One who is the Truth and the source of eternal happiness!
I affectionately greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims who are attending this solemn canonization of Edith Stein. As I entrust you to the intercession of this saint, a daughter of the Teresian Carmel, I am pleased to give you my Apostolic Blessing.
I cordially greet my compatriots, those present here and those participating in this celebration by radio and television. I rejoice with you that you have the opportunity to experience this solemn day, the canonization of Edith Stein — Sr Teresa Benedicta of the Cross, a martyr of Auschwitz.
I remember that in 1982, also in October, in this very place I was able to canonize Maximilian Mary Kolbe. I was always convinced that these two martyrs of Auschwitz together would lead us into the future: Maximilian Mary Kolbe and Edith Stein — St Teresa Benedicta of the Cross.
Today I am aware that a sort of cycle is being completed. I thank God for this and I am pleased that veneration of this saint is growing and spreading in our homeland. Praised be Jesus Christ!
   © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 4 October 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. At the end of this Eucharistic celebration, our thoughts turn to the Blessed Mother of God, invoked and venerated in shrines great and small dedicated to her in many places in this land of Croatia. We turn to her with the words spoken by the angel when he brought her the joyful message of salvation, prepared by God for humanity.
After yesterday’s pilgrimage to Marija Bistrica, this afternoon I shall visit the shrine of Our Lady of the Island at Solin, the age-old witness to the faith of your people.
2. In the light which radiates from the gentle face of Mary, I extend a special greeting to the dear people of Split who are celebrating the 1,7000 years of their city. I also greet the faithful of the Ecclesiastical Province of Split-Makarska, and all the other faithful people who are united through their Pastors with this Mass. 
I am particularly close to those who still today are anxiously awaiting definite news of the fate of their dear ones who disappeared during the recent war. I am likewise close to those who were driven from their homes by the violence of war and have still not been able to return, or if they have returned, need help to complete the work of rebuilding their homes in order to resume peaceful family life.
And how could we not recall with anxious concern the continuing tragedy taking place in the nearby region of Kosovo? May understanding, mutual respect, forgiveness and reconciliation at last take the place of violence and destruction. For this objective to be achieved, may the international community, with a great sense of solidarity, not fail to provide its timely help.
3. We entrust these hopes to the intercession of the Blessed Mother of God, invoking her protection on your families, the sick and the elderly, on all those suffering from the consequences of the recent conflict, on your villages and on your towns. We pray to the Blessed Virgin for the whole of South-East Europe, that the people who live there, finally reconciled with one another, may know peace and may share, with equal rights and duties, in the life of the great human family.
Today is the feast of St Francis of Assisi, a great defender of peace. Let us entrust to him the peace of the beloved Balkan nations. There are many people named after St Francis: the President of the Republic, Cardinal Kuhariæ, Archbishop Franiæ, Bishop Komarica and many others. To them all I extend my best wishes and those of us all.
St Francis, pray for us, and pray for Italy whose patron you are! Amen.
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 27 September 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today is the liturgical memorial of St Vincent de Paul, patron of all charitable associations. In considering this distinguished witness to the love of God and one's brethren, especially the poor and abandoned, we must turn our attention to one of the greatest challenges facing our conscience: the truly intolerable contrast between that portion of humanity which enjoys all the advantages of economic well-being and scientific progress, and the vast number of those who live in conditions of extreme poverty. In my Apostolic Letter Tertio millennio adveniente, I insisted that “commitment to justice and peace” should be “a necessary condition for the preparation and celebration of the Jubilee” (n. 51). In view of the Holy Year now at hand, it is therefore necessary to ask ourselves: where are we with our commitment?
As suggested by today's liturgy, we are urged to reflect on the Gospel parable of the impoverished Lazarus and the rich man. It clearly proclaims that in the stark contrast between the insensitive rich and the poor in need of everything, God is on the latter’s side. We cannot resign ourselves to the immoral spectacle of a world in which there are still people who die of hunger, who are homeless, who lack the most elementary education, who cannot find work and who are unable to receive the necessary treatment when they are ill. And this list of old and new forms of poverty could be enormously lengthened.
2. It is urgently necessary to promote a culture and policy of solidarity, beginning in the heart of each person, in his ability to let himself be challenged by those in need. Of course, given the complexity of these problems, personal commitment is not enough. Some problems, such as the international debt of poor countries, require a concerted response on the part of the international community.
However, only if the culture of solidarity grows within individuals and families, will it be possible to deal effectively with the great challenges of poverty and social injustice. As I recommended in my Apostolic Letter Dies Domini, Sunday must be a special day of charity if it is to be spent as the Lord’s Day in every respect.
3. May the Blessed Virgin help us all to grow in our sense of brotherhood. May Mary, invoked in the Litany of Loreto as Comfort of the Afflicted, also use our arms and our hearts to bring her comfort and motherly concern to all who are in need.
To the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors the Holy Father said:
Upon all the English-speaking visitors and pilgrims I invoke the loving intercession of Mary, Queen of Heaven. May God bless you and your families.
© Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
PASTORAL VISIT
OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL II
TO CHIAVARI AND BRESCIA (ITALY)
(SEPTEMBER 18-20, 1998)
ANGELUS
Sunday, 20 September 1998
  1. Giuseppe Tovini, this lay Christian whom I had the joy of proclaiming blessed today, stands before us and speaks to us with the example of his life, a life totally dedicated to the defence and promotion of the moral and spiritual values indispensable for renewing society. He was able to combine his vocation as husband and father of a family with his commitment to many Catholic initiatives.
During the hard struggles undertaken out of fidelity to the Gospel in the difficult political and social context of his time, he had recourse to the intercession of Mary, whom he had learned to venerate since childhood. To her motherly heart he commended the problems of teachers, workers and young people; it was she who inspired him in fulfilling his duties as a father; he always confided in her during illness and in the many moments of trial.
Today the new blessed invites us as well to turn our gaze to the tender Mother of Divine Grace, to draw from her the necessary strength to follow Christ in every circumstance.
2. Marian devotion, which has distinguished the cultured and Christian milieu of Brescia, also marked the life of the Servant of God Paul VI, the centenary celebrations of whose birth we are concluding today. I recall my venerable Predecessor with great affection and I am pleased to emphasize how he learned at a tender age to entrust himself to Mary, encouraged by the vicinity of his home to the Shrine of Our Lady of Grace. He celebrated his first Mass at this shrine and returned here every time he could to sing the Magnificat with the Mother of the Lord for the priceless gift of the priesthood. His vocation, as he himself confided, matured precisely in this atmosphere of fervent Marian devotion.
His love for Our Lady, which he expressed in his many documents and addresses, became more intense and evident during his Pontificate.
May the witness of Pope Paul VI and Giuseppe Tovini encourage us all to trust always in the Blessed Virgin and to find in her the sure path which leads to Christ, the only cornerstone on which it is possible to build the civilization of love we so desire.
Before imparting his Blessing, the Holy Father said extemporaneously:
We are grateful to Providence for this celebration, which was so Brescian and so Italian. Let me add that today the Church is also celebrating the Korean martyrs, whom I had the joy of raising to the honours of the altar several years ago in Seoul.
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 13 September 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. In many nations, September is the month when schools are back in session. Today I would like to devote my thoughts to the children and young people who are returning to school at this time and to wish them a diligent and productive school year.
Dear students, hold school in esteem! Return to it joyfully; consider it a great gift, a fundamental right which, of course, also involves duties. Think of all your contemporaries in many countries of the world who have no education at all. Illiteracy is a plague, a heavy “handicap”, which comes in addition to that of hunger and other miseries. With illiteracy, not only is some aspect of the economy or political life at issue, but the very dignity of the human being. The right to education is the right to be fully human.
Best wishes, then, dear students! Best wishes also to you, dear teachers, who carry out your work in conditions that are frequently anything but easy. Yours is a great mission. Society must become increasingly aware of this and provide schools with all they need to be equal to their tasks: what is spent on education is always a profitable investment.
2. The beginning of the school year gives us an opportunity to reflect on what school is called to be. So many things in the school system can and probably should be reviewed. But one thing must be clear: school cannot be limited to offering young people ideas in the various branches of knowledge; it must also help them to look in the right direction for the meaning of life.
From this stems its responsibility, especially in a period such as the present, when great social and cultural changes sometimes threaten to cast doubt on fundamental moral values.
School must help young people learn how to understand these values, by fostering the harmonious development of every dimension of their personality, from the physical and spiritual to the cultural and relational. And it must carry out this task in conjunction with the family, which has the primary and inalienable task of education. This is why parents, among other things, have the right and duty to choose the school which best corresponds to their own values and to the pedagogical needs of their children.
3. As we address our Angelus prayer to the Blessed Virgin, let us recall the education that she and Joseph gave Jesus. Their home in Nazareth was a little “school” for the One who, the Teacher par excellence, wanted to become a pupil like all the children and young people of the world. May Mary most holy, who was his mother and teacher, help parents and educators properly to fulfil their task, which is so crucial to the future of their children and of all humanity.
To the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors the Holy Father said:
Our Sunday Angelus has drawn English-speaking visitors from many parts of the world. May the unity that we discover in prayer help us to be more committed to building solidarity and peace among all peoples. God bless you and your families!
    © /FONT> Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 30 August 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. At this time a great many people are coming back from their holidays to return to ordinary life. I wish everyone on the road a peaceful trip, undertaken with the always necessary prudence, which is essential on these days of intense traffic.
I am trying to imagine what goes on in the mind of those returning from a period of relaxation, particularly one long desired and now already over. Perhaps they are filled with mixed feelings: joy and nostalgia, pleasant and unpleasant memories, even a sense of disappointment. Right away we are wrestling again with habitual worries and the usual annoyances. In short, we return to everyday reality, with its concreteness, its problems, its burdens.
All this could even be depressing. But there is an antidote to depression. What is it? To have in our hearts a great ideal, authentic values, which can give meaning to our life.
2. This is the condition of the true Christian. He can nurture a trustful optimism, because he is certain of not walking alone. In sending us Jesus, the eternal Son made man, God has drawn near to each of us. In Christ he has become our traveling companion. If time marches on inexorably, often shattering even our dreams, Christ, the Lord of time, gives us the possibility of an ever new life.
In journalistic language, the great flow of people as they leave on holiday and return home is often called an “exodus” and a “reverse exodus”. These expressions have a remote “biblical flavour”. As everyone knows, the Exodus was the great event in which the chosen people were freed from slavery in Egypt, while from the Christian standpoint, it recalls the paschal mystery and the journey that man is called to make by following Jesus, who frees us from sin and opens us to communion with God and our brethren.
All of Christian life is an “exodus”, that is, a journey in which we draw closer and closer to the Father’s house. Dear brothers and sisters, let us live this spiritual “exodus” and not allow material things to worry us to the point of becoming the only horizon of our life. Let us rediscover the joy of lifting our gaze to heaven, in order to give everything a more inward dimension that is deeper and richer in hope.
3. May the Blessed Virgin fill our hearts with a sense of life as a journey to be made in God’s company, just as it was for her. Many times the Gospel presents her to us on a journey, both before and after Jesus’ birth, until the final journey which led her to the foot of the Cross. Thus we see her as a “pilgrim” on the roads marked out by the divine plan. Let us call upon her as “St Mary of the Way”, as we follow in her footsteps and feel the presence of her motherly love.
After reciting the Angelus the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims in various languages. To the English-speaking visitors he said:
I extend a particular welcome to the new students of the Pontifical North American College who have just arrived in Rome to begin their programme of formation for the priesthood. Upon you and the superiors of the College, and upon all the English-speaking visitors and pilgrims, I cordially invoke the joy and peace of our Lord Jesus Christ.
© Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 23 August 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. As we return to the themes of the Apostolic Letter Dies Domini, today we have come to the last one, which presents Sunday to us as the day that reveals the meaning of time.
Each of us cannot fail to be aware, everyday, of how quickly our lives pass. And if we look at the great periods of history, how can we not ask ourselves about our future, about what awaits us, about the goal for which we strive?
The Christian answers these questions by pointing to Christ as the very meaning of history. In his divine and human mystery, he is at the origin of the world (cf. Jn 1:3) and is the goal of Creation (cf. Col 1:16). As the Redeemer, it is he in whom everything has been recapitulated (cf. Eph 1:10), to be saved and restored to God the Father.
In the light of this mystery, history assumes a positive meaning for Christians, despite the sometimes deadly trials and risks to which sin subjects it. Christ is stronger than sin and death! And Sunday, by making the memory of his Resurrection present at all times, is an opening of credit for the future, a comforting certainty, a prophetic reminder of the day when Christ will come in glory.
2. To help us live Christ’s mystery in time, the liturgy is divided into the various phases of the liturgical year. In addition to the fundamental moments — Christmas, Easter, Pentecost — other feasts of great importance are also solemnized by the Church as days of precept, with the obligation to participate in the Eucharist in accordance with the model of Sunday, which is rightly considered the “primordial feast”.
By deeply experiencing the riches of Sunday and those of the whole liturgical year, Christians will become ever more aware of their identity. This will also help them prepare properly for the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000. This event will certainly acquire a particular solemnity. Yet “this year and this special time will pass, as we look to other jubilees and other solemn events. As the weekly ‘solemnity’, however, Sunday will continue to shape the time of the Church’s pilgrimage, until that Sunday which will know no evening” (Dies Domini, n. 87).
3. We raise our eyes to Mary, asking her to enable us to discover the full importance of the Lord’s Day, which an author once evocatively described as the “lord of days”. May she help us perceive the continuous flow of days as a grace and a responsiblity, in the certainty that God loves us: indeed “his mercy”, as Mary proclaims in the Magnificat, “is on those who fear him, from generation to generation” (Lk 1:50).
The Holy Father then greeted those present in various languages. To the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors he said:
Commending the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors to the intercession of Mary, Mother and Queen, I gladly invoke almighty God’s blessings of joy and peace upon you and your families.
    © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 16 August 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. In my recent Apostolic Letter Dies Domini, I observed, among other things, that Sunday should be a day of joy and solidarity as well as a day of relaxation and rest, as it is commonly regarded.
A day of joy! Can joy be planned? Is this not a feeling that depends on the happy or sorrowful circumstances of life? In fact, genuine Christian joy cannot be reduced to a chance feeling: its foundations lie in the love God manifested to us in the Death and Resurrection of his Son.
This certainty gives us a profound reason to live and to hope. With their lives, the saints attest that we can experience deep joy even in conditions of physical and spiritual suffering, if we know we are surrounded by God’s love.
Sunday is an appropriate day for helping one another rediscover the deep roots of joy.
2. On the other hand, authentic joy cannot only be an individual experience, but needs to be shared and participated in. For believers and for Christian families, Sunday must become the day on which we feel a closer communion with our neighbour and meet the needs of those who, for one reason or another, are in a distressing situation.
In this way Sunday becomes a day of sharing.
Inviting a lonely person to dinner, offering the necessary to a needy family, visiting someone who is ill or in prison, giving some time to those who are passing through a difficult moment: these are a few of the many possible practical acts which can make Sunday a day of fraternal solidarity.
Lived in this way, the Lord’s day, as well as being truly valued, is also an expression of the “dies hominis”, the day of man, because it develops our humanity.
3. May Mary most holy help us to understand the importance of living the Lord’s day. Precisely in yesterday’s Gospel passage for the feast of the Assumption of Mary into heaven in body and spirit, we were shown the Blessed Virgin’s readiness, soon after conceiving Jesus in her womb, to visit her cousin Elizabeth, to help her and share with her the joy of the divine favours (cf. Lk 1:39-56).
These are the same sentiments which must be felt by those who encounter Christ in the Eucharist. Mass is not enclosed within the walls of a church: it is the source of transformation for everyday life, it is “mission”, it is a sending for proclamation and, at the same time, a sending for charitable acts.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims in various languages. To the English-speaking visitors he said:
To the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors I extend a cordial welcome, and in a special way I greet the Augustinian Youth Group from the United States. May these summer holidays bring everyone rest and a renewal of spirit. May they also be a time for more intense prayer, filled with faith and hope and love. God bless you and your families!
On Sunday, 16 August, after leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father deplored the terrible bombing in Northern Ireland on the previous day, the Solemnity of the Assumption, and expressed his hope that Irish people of goodwill would persevere with determination in building a peaceful coexistence.
Yesterday's joyful feast of the Assumption has been tragically marred by the latest terrible bombing in Northern Ireland. Once again, blind violence is attempting to impede the difficult path of peace and productive harmony which most discerning people are convinced is possible. Let us invoke eternal rest on those who have lost their lives in such a tragic and senseless way, and ask the Lord to bless and comfort the many injured, the families in mourning, and all who continue to put their trust in dialogue and agreement. My earnest hope for that beloved country is that Irish people of goodwill will not succumb to violence and that they will persevere with determination in building that peaceful coexistence on which the whole future depends.
© Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Saturday, 15 August 1998
    1. “Mary is taken up to heaven, and the angels of God shout for joy”.
Today’s liturgy invites us to turn our gaze to the Virgin whom all generations call blessed, because the Almighty did great things in her (cf. Lk 1:48-49). This very ancient and beloved solemnity of Our Lady which recurs every year to bring joy to believers’ hearts is an invitation to look up, to gaze at Mary who is also glorified in body, so that we can regain the true meaning of life and be encouraged to walk on its path with trust.
2. Today everything speaks of the extraordinary privilege granted to Mary, predestined to be generously associated with the Redeemer’s mission (cf. Lumen gentium, n. 61).
Full of grace, preserved from original sin, Mary never experienced its consequences, and at the end of her earthly life she was taken up body and soul into heaven, where we contemplate her as Our Lady of the Angels and Queen of the Universe.
The message that comes to us from today’s feast is as timely as ever because it invites us to consider the value and the deepest meaning of life on earth: a way that does not lead to nothingness but to a goal of eternal glory. Thus every human person’s destiny appears bright and open to hope. Having preceded us on the earthly pilgrimage, Mary awaits us as a caring and loving Mother and, from heaven, now asks us to walk unfalteringly to God’s kingdom. Gazing at Mary taken up into heaven, the present, in which the history of salvation is being fulfilled for us, is illumined by the glorious future we see resplendent in her.
3. Today Mary seems even closer to us: from heaven she sees us and protects us. Contemplation of paradise does not distance us from the earth; indeed on the contrary, it is an incentive to us to work with all our might to transform our world in view of eternity. In our minds resounds the Apostle’s invitation to seek the “things that are above” (Col 3:1), where an eternal dwelling place is prepared for us in the common house of the Father.
Dear brothers and sisters, may Mary help us live today’s celebration intensely and savour its full spiritual richness. May the light of her faith dispel the darkness of our spirit; may her vision of God remind us of the Lord’s constant presence; may the splendour of her beauty prepare and accompany us to our encounter with the Father.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted those present in various languages. To the English-speaking visitors he said:
My greeting also goes to the Englishspeaking pilgrims and visitors. May the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary into Heaven remind us all of our true destiny and fill us with hope. May the Queen of Heaven guide and protect you and your families.
   © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 9 August 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. In the recent Apostolic Letter Dies Domini on keeping Sunday holy, I wrote that the Eucharistic assembly is the heart of the Day of the Lord. Therefore to observe Sunday properly, our first task is to take part in Holy Mass. This is a serious obligation, as the Catechism of the Catholic Church has recalled (n. 2181), but, yet more important, it is a deep need which cannot but be felt by Christian souls.
The sacrifice made once and for all on Golgotha is renewed in every Eucharist, and the Church, uniting her sacrifice to that of the Lord, announces his death and proclaims his Resurrection as she awaits his coming. If this is true for Holy Mass celebrated on any day, it is especially true with regard to Sunday, since Sunday is particularly associated with the commemoration of Christ’s Resurrection.
2. Sunday is the day when the whole community is called together; this is why it is also called dies Ecclesiae, the day of the Church.
On this day, the Christian assembly listens to the Word of God, proclaimed in abundance and with solemnity; thus in the first part of Mass there is a true dialogue of the Lord with his people.
Then, through participation in the one banquet, communion is deepened among those who are united in the Spirit of Christ. The Sunday Eucharist is thus the privileged place in which the Church manifests herself as a sacrament of unity, “sign and instrument of communion with God and of unity among all men” (Lumen gentium, n. 1).
There is an urgent need for the Lord’s disciples to offer this witness of fraternal unity in a world that is frequently fragmented, torn and scarred by outbreaks of division, violence and war.
3. May Mary most holy who was with the Apostles in prayer on the day of Pentecost, obtain for our Eucharistic assemblies the gift of effectively showing the presence of the risen Christ and of his Spirit. May her constant intercession ensure that the faithful live as “one heart and soul” (cf. Acts 4:32), ever ready to respond to anyone who asks them to account for the hope that is in them (cf. 1 Pt 3:15).
To the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors the Holy Father said:
I extend a warm welcome to the English-speaking pilgrims who have come for this Marian prayer. The Gospel tells us that Mary kept everything which referred to Jesus, meditating on it in her heart (cf. Lk 2:51). Her example invites us to discover the importance of contemplative prayer in our lives. May God abundantly bless you and your families!
     © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 2 August 1998
   Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Next Thursday will be the Feast of the Transfiguration of the Lord, a particularly significant day, rich in memories. My venerable Predecessor, the Servant of God Paul VI, the centenary of whose birth is being celebrated today, died in Castel Gandolfo precisely on 6 August, 20 years ago. I will have another opportunity to pay a solemn tribute to his memory during my pilgrimage to Brescia on 20 September.
Today I would like to go back in spirit to 6 August 1964, when he had been Pope for little more than a year and published his first Encyclical, Ecclesiam suam, during the Second Vatican Ecumenical Council. Although he himself said he merely wanted to offer the Church a “fraternal and informal message” (n. 7), this Encyclical is a programmatic document of his Pontificate and in a certain way sums up his whole personality as priest, teacher and attentive expert in humanity and in history.
2. Re-reading the pages of Ecclesiam suam, we realize how it is first and foremost an act of love for the Church and a profound reflection on three interrelated aspects: the Church’s conscience, her authentic renewal and her relationship with the world.
The third part, entitled “The Dialogue”, illustrates — as the Pontiff himself writes — an “attitude which the Catholic Church should adopt at this period in the history of the world” (n. 58). The document is largely concerned with the treatment of dialogue as a style and method of relating to modern society. This is why Ecclesiam suam is often described as the “Encyclical of dialogue” which is still totally up to date.
In our time, as we look towards the third millennium, it should be re-read with greater attention and deeper understanding in order to grasp its full prophetic value and to implement the Council’s directives in the best way.
3. When he closed the fifth session of the Council on 21 November that same year, Paul VI said that “knowledge of the true Catholic teaching on Mary will always be a key to the exact understanding of the mystery of Christ and of the Church” (AAS 56 (1964), 1115). Immediately afterwards he proclaimed Mary “Mother of the Church”.
Today, as I recall those moments of deep spiritual fervour which God has granted me to live, I would like to renew the entrustment of the entire ecclesial community of the whole world to Mary, Mother of the Redeemer and Mother of the Church.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims and visitors in various languages. To the English-speaking vistors he said:
I extend a warm welcome to the English-speaking visitors present at our Marian prayer, especially to the large group from the Allstate Insurance Company from the United States of America. Our prayer today to God, through Mary, is an invocation of peace for people in every part of the world who are deprived of justice and subjected to violence. May God bless you and your families!
    © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 26 July 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. As I recalled in my recent Apostolic Letter Dies Domini, from the dawn of Christianity Sunday has been considered as the day of Christ — dies Christi — since it is linked to the memory of his Resurrection. Indeed, the Lord was raised on “the first day after the Sabbath” (cf. Mt 16:2, 9: Lk 24:1; Jn 20:1) and, in the early morning on this same day, the women who had gone there found the tomb empty. The Gospel says that Jesus was recognized by Mary Magdalen; that he accompanied the two disciples on the road to Emmaus; that he revealed himself to the Eleven gathered together and reappeared to them on the following Sunday, overcoming the disbelief and doubts of Thomas. Fifty days later, Pentecost occurred with the powerful outpouring of the Holy Spirit on the newborn Church.
In a certain way Sunday is the continuation of these first Sundays in Christian history: the day of the risen Christ and of the gift of the Spirit.
2. Unlike civil calendars, the liturgy does not consider Sunday the last day of the week but indeed the first. In this way its dignity is underlined and it is stressed that with Christ’s Resurrection time “begins again”, made fruitful by the seed of eternity, and marches on towards its ultimate goal which is the glorious coming of the Son of God, anticipated and prefigured by his victory over death.
Sunday is thus the day of faith par excellence, a day on which believers, contemplating the face of the risen Christ, are called to repeat with Thomas: “My Lord and my God!” (Jn 20:28), and to relive in the Eucharist the Apostles’ experience when the Lord entered the Upper Room and made them a gift of his Spirit.
3. Dear Brothers and Sisters, it is not difficult to see that this “holy day” has an extraordinarily rich meaning. Its religious significance is naturally not in opposition to the human values which make Sunday a time of rest, of enjoying nature and of more relaxed social relations. These are values which unfortunately risk being frustrated by a hedonistic and frenzied way of life. Living them in the light of the Gospel, Christians impress their full meaning upon them.
May Mary help us appreciate Sunday as a feast day and a day of faith. May we learn from her to spend it combining praise of God with real family relaxation.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the faithful in several languages. To the English-speaking visitors and pilgrims he said:
I extend a warm welcome to the English-speaking pilgrims, and invite you to make this period of summer rest a time of spiritual growth and renewal. In particular I ask everyone to rediscover the importance of Sunday, the day on which we are called to celebrate our salvation through the risen Christ. God bless you all!
  © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 19 July 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. I am delighted today to be in Borno, in the marvellous setting of these mountains which rise powerfully and majestically to the sky. I cordially greet you all, dear people of Borno, and I thank you for your welcome. I greet the holiday-makers who come here during the summer to breathe the fresh air and to seek refreshment among your pine forests and mountains, and I turn my thoughts to the entire Valle Camonica, rich in religious traditions and natural beauty. I extend a particular greeting to Bishop Bruno Foresti of Brescia, to Auxiliary Bishop Vigilio Olmi and to your parish priest, Fr Giuseppe Maffi, whom I thank for his welcome. I am also pleased that I can meet Archbishop Giovanni Battista Re, my close, very dear and very faithful collaborator, here in his native town.
2. Dear people of Borno, you have wished to welcome me in front of your parish church, which overlooks your homes and is an important reference point for your faith and history. From this place dear to you, I would like to say to everyone: love your faith, bear witness to it joyfully, make it active through fraternal love, generous forgiveness and mutual, supportive help.
I would like to extend this invitation to those who are far from the Church or are non-believers: do not be afraid to seek God, because he is seeking you and loves you. And I would like to tell young people, who are the hope of the third millennium: invest your life wisely, for it is a talent to be made fruitful; remember that you only live once.
Thinking precisely of young people, I would like to recall that in his youth Giovanni Battista Montini, who later became Pope Paul VI, used to spend his summer holidays here in Borno with his parents. In 1920, a few weeks after his ordination to the priesthood, he celebrated Holy Mass here in your church. This year is the centenary of his birth and, in expectation of its solemn commemoration in Brescia next September, I would now like to invite you to pray that the many young people of the Borno community, of Valle Camonica and of the whole Diocese of Brescia will follow the example of his fidelity to the Lord on the path of the priesthood or the consecrated life.
3. Dear brothers and sisters, it is easier in the midst of this wonderful natural scenery to raise one’s gaze to the Creator and to praise him for his works. In my Apostolic Letter Dies Domini I pointed out that it is precisely this contemplative gaze which must characterize Sunday, the Lord’s Day.
My hope is that your holiday period will encourage you to rediscover the Christian meaning of Sunday, a day of rest but especially a day of community prayer; a day when the risen Christ fills us with hope and joy; a day given to man for his own good.
May Our Blessed Lady, whom we call upon today in the Angelus prayer, help us in this task of spiritual enrichment and help you all constantly to revive your faith and dedication to those Christian values which are at the roots of Borno and of the traditions of these valleys so rich in devotion and active fidelity to the Gospel.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
I would now like to offer my most cordial greetings to the elderly and the sick, to whom I feel particularly close.
My thoughts turn next to the young people of Grest who, thanks to the annual summer programme organized by the parish, can spend a time of healthy rest together and of good leisure activities. I hope that this holiday season will offer each one the opportunity to enjoy the company of his peers in mutual cooperation and a spirit of brotherhood.
I would also like to extend an affectionate greeting to the children of Chernobyl, Belarus, who are present here, as well as to the group of families who have been hosting them for several years, offering them a peaceful and restorative visit. I appreciate and gladly encourage these programmes of effective solidarity, which help us to feel we are citizens of one common home.
My heartfelt gratitude also goes to the members of the Alpine Corps who have helped to make this brief but intense meeting so orderly. My gratitude goes as well to the Civil Defence representatives, whom I thank for their assistance.
My wish is that everyone here, all the people of Borno, the entire Diocese and all the guests will enjoy a tranquil summer among the mountains of Borno and the Valcamonica. Have a pleasant Sunday and a good week!
© Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
1 January 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. On this first day of the New Year, I have the joy of offering my cordial greeting to everyone: “Peace be with you!”. Today’s liturgy celebrates the Solemnity of Mary, Mother of God, testifying that in the Blessed Virgin’s divine motherhood is revealed the radical newness, the fulfilment of every hope, the guarantee of every plan for authentic renewal and human development. Beginning in 1968, Pope Paul VI wished to dedicate this day to reflection and prayer for peace, accompanied by a Message addressed primarily to Heads of State and representatives of nations. I too have carried on this beautiful initiative by continuing to issue my Message for World Day of Peace.
This year it is my 20th, and its theme is: “From the justice of each comes peace for all”. I chose this topic because the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights occurs in 1998. It begins with the memorable declaration that “recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world” (Preamble).
2. Will the Year 2000 succeed in making a significant improvement in building peace? This is what everyone hopes, but for this to happen, it is indispensable that everyone be committed to justice, to respecting human rights and to consistently fulfilling the duties involved. The globalization process occurring throughout the world needs to be oriented towards equity and solidarity, to avoid marginalizing individuals, groups and peoples, in fact if not in intention. We must strive to be that “family of nations” I mentioned in my speech to the General Assembly of the United Nations on 5 October 1995.
The commitment to co-ordinated reduction of the poorest countries' foreign debt is certainly a positive step in this direction, but a lasting solution will require a concerted effort from all. Furthermore, in every nation the culture of lawfulness and good administration must be promoted, and corruption must be fought. The Great Jubilee which lies before us is a strong call for believers to the spirit of sharing and a simple way of life, as the condition for an ever more equitable distribution of the fruits of creation.
3. Dear brothers and sisters, on its way towards the Year 2000 our human family has a concerned and faithful Mother: the Mother of God who wanted to share our human condition to show men the way of justice. Today, at the beginning of a new year, Mary shows Jesus to everyone and repeats: Here is the Way of peace! Do whatever he tells you. Let each person work for justice and peace will be born for all. O Mary, Mother of God, Mirror of Justice and Queen of Peace, pray for us!
After praying the Angelus the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims in several languages.
To the English-speaking visitors he said:
I am pleased to greet the English-speaking visitors and pilgrims, and I wish all of you a Happy New Year filled with every blessing and grace from almighty God! As we continue our preparation for the Jubilee of the Year 2000, it is my special prayer that you, like the Blessed Virgin Mary, will be open to the promptings of the Holy Spirit so that you and your families may be brought ever closer to Jesus Christ, the Lord and Saviour of all the world.
At the end of his greetings, the Holy Father spoke a few words extemporaneously.
The year 1997 has brought us good weather, good weather yesterday and today. Let us thank the Lord. All my best wishes to you!
© Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 12 July 1998
    Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. My most cordial greetings to you all! From this restful place amid the marvellous scenery of the Cadore, I wish to return to the theme of the Apostolic Letter Dies Domini published last Tuesday. I would especially like to reflect on one aspect of Sunday which links the Christian holy day to what the Bible says about the “Sabbath”, the Lord’s Day in the Old Testament, still celebrated today by our Jewish brothers and sisters.
As it concludes its account of the week of creation — an account which blends deep religious sentiment with sublime poetry — the first chapter of Genesis says that “on the seventh day God finished his work which he had done” and “blessed the seventh day and hallowed it” (Gn 2:2-3). The “shabbat”, the biblical Sabbath, is linked to this mystery of God’s rest. If we Christians celebrate Sunday as the Lord’s Day, it is because it was on this day that Christ’s Resurrection occurred; it is the fulfilment of the first creation and the beginning of the “new creation”. God’s “rest” reaches its full achievement in the risen Christ.
2. With the image of God resting, the Bible indicates the Creator’s joyful pleasure in the work of his hands. On the “seventh day” God turns to look at man and the world with admiration and love, a sentiment that is confirmed throughout salvation history, when the Creator, especially in the Exodus events, becomes the saviour of his people.
Thus, the “Lord’s Day” is the day that shows God’s love for his creatures. The prophets are not afraid to extol this relationship of love in marital terms (cf. Hos 2:16-24; Jer 2:2, etc.): from being the Creator, God became the “bridegroom” of humanity, and the Incarnation of his Son would be the high point of this mystical union.
On Sunday Christians are invited to rediscover God’s joyful gaze and to feel in a way surrounded and protected by it. In this technological age, our life is at ever greater risk of becoming an anonymous function of the productive process. Man thus becomes unable to enjoy the beauties of creation and, even more, to see the reflection of God’s face in them. Christians pause every Sunday not only because they need legitimate rest, but especially to celebrate the work of God, the Creator and Redeemer. From this celebration flow joy and hope, which give everyday life a new flavour and are a vital antidote to the boredom, lack of meaning or desperation to which they can sometimes feel tempted.
3. My soul magnifies the Lord! We praise the Lord with the words of the Blessed Virgin, whom the Church considers tota pulchra, “all fair”, the woman in whom the beauty of the first creation and of the new creation come together. May she enable us to be aware of God’s gifts and may Sunday become more and more the day when individuals and families gather for the Eucharist and spend a restful time filled with Christian joy and solidarity, singing the Lord’s praise with the same sentiments in Mary’s heart.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the Bishops of BellunoFeltre and Treviso, in whose Dioceses he is spending his holidays, and Cardinal Salvatore Pappalardo, former Archbishop of Palermo, who was also present. The Pope went on to greet the many parish and diocesan groups who had gathered for the Angelus, and he thanked the State Forestry Service and the security forces for helping to make his holidays so pleasant. Also present for the Angelus was the elderly parish priest of Lorenzago, Fr Sesto Da Prà, on whom the Holy Father conferred the title “monsignor” in the presence of his Bishop and parishioners, and then warmly embraced him.
  © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 5 July 1998
    Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The Apostolic Letter Dies Domini on keeping Sunday holy will be published next Tuesday, 7 July. I signed it on 31 May, the day of Pentecost, to emphasize that it is a special fruit of this year which, during the immediate preparation for the Jubilee, is especially dedicated to reflection on the Holy Spirit.
It is, in fact, the Holy Spirit who continually brings to the Church’s remembrance the riches of the mystery of Redemption and helps believers in every generation to rediscover and to live them.
Indeed, the rediscovery of Sunday is one of the urgent priorities in the life of the Christian community today. For many people, in fact, this day risks being considered and lived merely as the “weekend”. But Sunday is quite different: it is the day of the week when the Church celebrates Christ’s Resurrection. It is the weekly Easter!
That is why it is the “Lord’s Day” par excellence, as its very name “domenica” recalls, retained in Italian and other languages, which corresponds to the Latin “dies dominica” or “dies Domini”.
2. In obedience to the third commandment, Sunday must be kept holy, above all by participation in Holy Mass.
There was a time in traditionally Christian countries when this was made easier by the whole cultural context. Today, in order to remain faithful to Sunday practice, it is often necessary to go “against the tide”.
Thus, a renewed consciousness of faith is necessary.
Do not be afraid, dear friends, to open your time to Christ! Time given to him is not wasted; on the contrary, it is time gained for our humanity; it is time which fills our days with light and hope.
With this Apostolic Letter I would like first of all to address Pastors, sharing with them this basic pastoral concern. I would also like, in a certain sense, to have an open-hearted dialogue with all the individual members of the faithful, as I am accustomed to doing on my visits to the parishes of Rome. I intend to return to this theme during our forthcoming Sunday meetings for the Angelus.
I offer this new document to you all, dear brothers and sisters, at the beginning of this holiday season of legitimate relaxation, but one which does not mean a time of “emptiness”. Why not take this booklet with you and devote a few hours to quietly reading it? It might prove, at least in certain respects, to be an interesting “discovery”.
3. We pray that the Blessed Virgin will prepare the Christian community to accept the message of this Apostolic Letter. May she spur the faithful to ask themselves about the way they spend Sunday and encourage Pastors to give this topic all the importance it deserves, despite the difficulties of our time. This will also be a valuable contribution to the celebration of the Great Jubilee.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
These days the sun reminds us that the holiday season has returned. The Pope will also be leaving on Wednesday afternoon for a few days of rest and reflection at Lorenzago, in the Cadore. This window, then, will remain closed until after the summer.
I wish everyone holidays that are physically restful and spiritually restorative.
My most cordial greeting to everyone!
   © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Monday, 29 June 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today we are celebrating the holy Apostles Peter and Paul: it is a feast throughout the Church and an especially important one in Rome, which venerates them as her patrons. Providence wanted Peter’s pastoral ministry and Paul’s missionary activity to end in the city of Rome, where both received the seal of martyrdom. The fact that she was marked by the blood of the two great Apostles constitutes the basis, both spiritual and historical, for the unique role exercised in the universal Church by the community of Rome and its Bishop.
If Jerusalem represents both the origins of Christianity and the heavenly city, and as such preserves a perennial value as a reminder of the sources of the faith and the goal after earthly life, Rome instead has been entrusted with a central role in the Church’s mission down the centuries: a task which consists in guaranteeing and promoting doctrinal and pastoral communion, and in supporting evangelization to the very ends of the earth.
May the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000 reinforce missionary commitment throughout the Church and the quest for full unity among Christians belonging to different confessions.
2. In this regard, I address a cordial greeting to the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople, His Holiness Bartholomew I, whom I thank for sending a distinguished delegation to Rome for today’s solemnity. The presence of representatives of the Orthodox Church is especially pleasing and significant today, and I will be glad to reciprocate this courtesy, as is our happy custom, on the next feast of St Andrew, brother of Simon Peter and patron of Constantinople.
I again extend my greetings to the dear Metropolitan Archbishops on whom I have just conferred the pallium, a sign of communon with the See of Peter.
3. I would next like to express my warm fatherly wishes for peace and goodness to the Diocese of Rome! Dear Romans and all you who live in the city of Peter and Paul, I bless you in the name of your holy patrons, and I urge you: always have a living memory of this city’s Christian roots and be aware of the spiritual mission entrusted to it. The City Mission, which is fully under way, calls for the help of all believers, so that the Rome of the Year 2000 may be faithful to the values of the Gospel and express them in concrete actions. Only in this way can they face together the problems and difficulties that the life of a great city poses each day.
Let us entrust these tasks to Blessed Mary, Queen of Apostles and the Salvation of the Roman People.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father appealed for an end to the conflict in Guinea-Bissau:
As efforts intensify to end the conflict in Guinea-Bissau, I again fervently encourage all initiatives that rely on dialogue and reject the recourse to armed conflict.
With appreciation and affection, I am following day by day the tireless work of Bishop Settimio Ferrazzetta and the faithful, generous solidarity of the religious personnel.
I hope that the parties concerned will spare no effort to guarantee the necessary assistance to the masses of evacuees and, in particular, border access to the humanitarian convoys.
  © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 29 November 1998
  1. Today the season of Advent opens a new liturgical year. It is the Church year, focused on the two great mysteries of the Incarnation and the Redemption, Christmas and Easter. This is “God's time”, given to men and women so that their works and days may be open to the dimension of the Eternal.
The cycle of the years, centuries and millenniums have received their meaning and direction from the moment that God became man and entered into time: the whole universe, created and redeemed by God, is on its way to fulfilment, already anticipated in Christ's paschal mystery.
All this is a plan of love and as such it is not fulfilled in a deterministic way but in freedom, thus in the context of a dramatic struggle between good and evil. Every person is called to give willing support to God’s plan, after the example of Blessed Mary, who, by accepting the incarnate Word, became the New Eve, Mother of redeemed humanity.
2. Advent, which begins today, takes on a truly special meaning because it opens the last year of the second millennium. The gaze of Christians and of all humanity is drawn to the Jubilee, now close at hand, which will celebrate the 2,000th anniversary of the Incarnation of the Son of God.
The year 1999 will complete the three-year period of immediate preparation for this historic spiritual event: after the year of Jesus Christ and that of the Holy Spirit, this is the year of God the Father. I invite everyone to make a spiritual pilgrimage to the dwelling of the heavenly Father, rich in mercy; a journey of conversion in love, in sharing with the very poor and in dialogue with one's brothers and sisters.
3. Connected with this preparation is the City Mission, which I called to help Romans renew their faith in view of the Holy Year and to bring the proclamation of Christ to every resident in the context where he lives, works, studies, labours or suffers.
I encourage the many missionaries who have made fruitful visits to families to strengthen this important form of evangelization and, at the same time, I invite them and every working Christian — labourer, teacher, professional, craftsman, merchant — to take an active role in this mission wherever they are employed.
To mark this new phase of the City Mission, I have written a Letter on the Gospel of Work to the whole Diocese, which will be published on the forthcoming feast of the Immaculate Conception. It is meant as a sign of hope and an invitation to collaborate with all those who work in the different sectors or who are unfortunately unemployed and are having difficulty finding work.
Let us pray that Mary, the faithful Virgin, will help us spend this Advent season well. May the Lord’s coming not find us locked in indifference or pride, but waiting attentively in active love!
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
The tragedies of the last few days in the Adriatic Sea, off the coast of Apulia, with numerous refugees dead or missing, dramatically calls to our attention the problem of the illegal transport of people who entrust themselves to unscrupulous traffickers in the hope of achieving a better life.
As I pray for the victims of these shipwrecks, I cannot but express the strongest condemnation of those who, greedy for profit, exploit the wretchedness of so many poor people. These deaths are destined to weigh on their consciences!
At the same time, I feel it my duty to remind the leaders of the countries concerned of their responsibilities: it is urgently necessary to take effective measures to prevent this dishonest trafficking and to create dignified living conditions for people who otherwise are led to seek their fortune elsewhere.
Lastly, I take this occasion to express my appreciation and encouragement to the communities of the Salento, who for years have been making an indispensable contribution of generous solidarity to this serious problem. May the national and international community not ignore them in their praiseworthy but difficult undertaking!
  © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 28 June 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. We have reached the last Sunday of June, the month dedicated to the Sacred Heart of Jesus, while in July the Church expresses with special intensity her devotion to his Most Precious Blood. Through these spiritual emphases, tradition invites us to fix our gaze of faith on the mystery of God’s love, revealed in the Incarnation of the Son. Christ offers his human and divine Heart, source of reconciliation and principle of new life in the Holy Spirit, to today’s men and women who are immersed in a secularized world and risk losing the centre of gravity in their lives.
On the threshold of the third millennium, the Church proclaims to all people with renewed emphasis: Christ is the heart of the world; the paschal mystery of his Death and Resurrection is the centre of history which, thanks to him, is the history of salvation; his love draws every creature to himself and makes those who believe in him one heart and one mind, spurring Christians of every age to search for full unity.
2. At the end of a careful evaluation process, which involved the Catholic Church and the Lutheran World Federation, we can now rejoice at an important ecumenical achievement. I am referring to the Joint Declaration of the Catholic Church and the Lutheran World Federation on the Doctrine of Justification. This declaration states that, as a result of the dialogue which began immediately after the Second Vatican Council, the Churches belonging to the Lutheran World Federation and the Catholic Church have reached a high degree of agreement on a point, that of justification, which has been so disputed for centuries. Although the declaration does not solve all the problems concerning the teaching of the doctrine of justification, it expresses a consensus in basic truths of the doctrine of justification (cf. “The Response of the Catholic Church to the Joint Declaration between the Catholic Church and the Lutheran World Federation on the Doctrine of Justification”).
I hope that this progress in the Lutheran-Catholic dialogue, a gift of God’s Spirit of Wisdom at the end of the second millennium, will encourage and strengthen the declared goal for which Lutherans and Catholics are striving: the achievement of full visible unity. I thank all the Catholics and Lutherans who have contributed to this important advance, and I ask the Lord to continue supporting us on our way to unity.
3. Today, Italy is celebrating Papal Charities Day. I would like to take this occasion to express my warm thanks to all who generously help the Holy See’s activities and the works of solidarity it promotes. May the Lord fill them with his goodness through the intercession of the holy Apostles, Peter and Paul.
Let each of us entrust our prayer intentions to Mary, Mother of the Church, and invoke her maternal protection.
© Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
APOSTOLIC JOURNEY
OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL II
TO AUSTRIA (JUNE 19-21, 1998)
ANGELUS
Vienna, Sunday, 21 June 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
At the end of this moving celebration, our thoughts turn to Mary, Magna Mater Austriae. For centuries down to the present time, the Austrian people have put themselves under her protection and mantle. The three new blesseds also entrusted themselves and their prayers to her motherly intercession. They said "yes" to their own mission, as Mary had to the Angel's message.
Bl. Fr Anton Maria Schwartz said "yes" to the daily challenges he experienced in his pastoral care of workers.
Bl. Fr Jakob Kern said "yes" to the illness and suffering which afflicted him despite his youth.
Bl. Sr Restituta Kafka said "yes" to the Cross, which for her was not merely a piece of jewelry, but became her way of life.
May the three new blesseds be for all of you a model and an incentive to say "yes" to the path God wishes to take with you.
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 14 June 1998
     Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today the Solemnity of the Body and Blood of Christ, better known by its Latin name, Corpus Christi, is being celebrated in many countries, including Italy.
Every Sunday the ecclesial community gathers round the Eucharist, the sacrament of Christ’s redeeming sacrifice instituted at the Last Supper. But the Christian people’s devotion to this central mystery of the faith felt the need, about seven centuries ago, for a specific celebration in which they could give full expression to their adoration of the Body and Blood of our Lord, the source and summit of the Church’s life.
Processions with the Blessed Sacrament are a favourite, traditional expression of popular Eucharistic piety and take place in local Churches all over the world on today’s solemnity. They are a particularly eloquent sign that the Lord Jesus, who died and rose again, continues to walk the paths of the world and, with his itinerant presence, guides the way of Christian generations: he nourishes their faith, hope and love; he comforts them in their trials and sustains them in their commitment to justice and peace.
2. How can we not rejoice today at God’s wonderful solidarity with humanity? As he did with the disciples at Emmaus, in the Eucharist Jesus stands by us as pilgrims in history, in cities and villages, in the North and South of the world, in traditionally Christian countries and in those being evangelized for the first time.
Everywhere Christ spreads the same message: “Love one another as I have loved you”, and in the Eucharist he offers himself as the spiritual strength for putting this commandment into practice and for building the civilization of love.
Today, I like to think of the journey towards the Jubilee of the Year 2000 as a great Corpus Christi processison that will culminate in the World Eucharistic Congress, scheduled to take place in Rome in June of the Holy Year. Therefore, I urge all the faithful, especially sacred ministers, to strengthen and deepen their spiritual bond with the Eucharist, in which the full saving power of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit is present and active.
3. The first Corpus Christi procession occurred in a certain sense when Mary, bearing the newly conceived Jesus in her womb, left Nazareth to visit her cousin Elizabeth. In contemplating this Gospel icon, may the Church hasten her steps towards contemporary man and proclaim to him with renewed love the Good News of salvation.
After praying the Angelus the Holy Father said:
The conference called by the United Nations to set up an International Criminal Court for judging the most serious crimes against humanity will begin tomorrow.
I hope that the work of this important meeting will be inspired by a desire to provide for the adequate defence of fundamental and inalienable human rights.
As I assure you of the Holy See’s active contribution to this important conference, I offer my best wishes to all the participants that it will constitute a historic step on the way to mutual understanding between nations.
I greet all those who have gathered here on this beautiful sunny day in St Peter’s Square to recite the Marian prayer of the Angelus. I also greet those who joined us through radio and television. I wish everyone a joyful Sunday!
   © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 7 June 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today the Church celebrates the Solemnity of the Holy Trinity, which offers for our prayerful contemplation the mystery of God: Father, Son and Holy Spirit. In the Trinity we can discern the primordial model of the human family, consisting of a man and woman called to give themselves to each other in a communion of love that is open to life. In the Trinity we also find the model of the ecclesial family, in which all Christians are called to live in a relationship of real sharing and solidarity. Love is the concrete sign of faith in God the Father, Son and Holy Spirit.
The Second Person of the Holy Trinity, who was incarnated and became man in Christ, is present among us in the sacrament of the Eucharist. This sacrament is the Church’s greatest treasure, which she preserves with immense gratitude and love. The feast of Corpus Christi is dedicated to the Eucharist and we will celebrate it next Thursday afternoon with a solemn Mass at St John Lateran, followed by the traditional procession. I invite you all to take part.
2. Tomorrow the Special Session of the United Nations General Assembly dedicated to the fight against drugs will open in New York. All the countries of the globe will examine together how to free the world from the production of, the demand for and the illegal trafficking in narcotics. These sad phenomena are a deadly trade, which corrupts and weakens the most personal aspect of human beings, that is, their ability to understand and their freedom to love, and deeply wounds so many families.
While encouraging the many efforts, including those sponsored by the Church, which offer drug dependants the possibility of overcoming this evil and of taking their place again in society, I firmly hope that this important meeting in New York will give a new, concrete impetus to international cooperation, for a humanity of greater freedom and solidarity.
3. We confidently entrust these hopes to the Blessed Virgin, the perfect Temple of the Trinity. In the hands of Mary, the model of love which has become a gift, we place every act of Christian solidarity and human sympathy for the sufferings of our brothers and sisters.
May Our Lady help us to make our lives a hymn of praise and love to God, who is eternal blessedness, immortal life and unfading light.
    © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA COELI
31 May 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
This solemn Eucharistic celebration, which has let us relive the mystery of Pentecost, is drawing to a close. It has been prepared in a way by yesterday’s great meeting with the numerous representatives of ecclesial movements and new communities. The great enthusiasm of those hours we spent together praying to the Holy Spirit continues to echo vibrantly in my heart. Let us give thanks to the Lord for this springtime of the Church, brought forth by the Spirit’s renewing power.
We feel the special presence of the Mother of Jesus, Mary most holy, in the centre of this Roman and universal Cenacle. Let us entrust to her loving guidance the brothers and sisters to whom I have just had the joy of administering the sacraments of Confirmation and the Eucharist.
We commend to the Queen of Apostles the movements and other forms of missionary commitment which have arisen in recent years. In her hands we place the universal mission of the whole Church, which since the day of Pentecost continues on her way over the centuries with constantly renewed zeal, to bring the Gospel of salvation to every region of the world. It is in this context that I am pleased to mention that precisely today I signed the Message for the next World Mission day. I symbolically present it to those of you present here and to the whole Church, in the hope that it will contribute to the work of the new evangelization in view of the third millennium now close at hand.
The Holy Father then greeted the pilgrims in English, French, Spanish, German and Polish:
I warmly greet all of you who are here to celebrate Pentecost. May the risen Saviour renew in you the sevenfold gift of his Spirit. Open your hearts ever wider to this Spirit, so that you may be courageous witnesses of the Gospel.
On this day of Pentecost, when the Church asks the Spirit for the courage to take the Gospel to the very ends of the earth, I address a cordial greeting to the French-speaking members of movements and to all the pilgrims in Rome, as well as to the faithful who have joined us through the communications media.
With great joy I greet the Spanish-speaking faithful gathered in this square, where today the Church’s catholicity is manifested, to pray together for the gifts of a new Pentecost after the example of Mary and the Apostles.
I extend a cordial greeting to all the pilgrims from German-speaking countries, especially to the members of spiritual movements, which are celebrating the Church’s birthday in Rome. I wish you all a happy Pentecost in the fullness of the Holy Spirit!
Lastly, I greet the Polish pilgrims present here physically and spiritually. On this day I cannot fail to think of Our Lady of Piekary and our “Oases”. “Let your Spirit come down and renew the face of the earth”. Today, on the day of Pentecost, I repeat these words: the words of the prayer I offered in 1979, with our homeland particularly in mind, and I have continued to offer it each day to God. May the power of the Holy Spirit, the Paraclete, pervade the daily life of all Poles and be an inexhaustible source of fraternal love and peace.
  © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
REGINA COELI
24 may 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. We will now sing together the Regina Caeli, a Marian prayer that lets us relive the Blessed Virgin's intense Easter joy at her Son’s Resurrection. Mary watchfully accompanies believers on their journey, and your city bears many signs of her special protection. Right before me stands the imposing church dedicated to the Great Mother of God, one of the many which the piety of Turin’s people has raised in honour of Our Lady.
How can we fail to remember the filial Marian devotion of the many saints and blesseds who come from Turin and, in particular, St John Bosco, who always had an affectionate enthusiasm for Mary, Help of Christians, whose liturgical memorial occurs today? Mary is our Mother and a true help for every Christian.
2. Today our thoughts naturally turn to the place not far from here where the Shroud is preserved. The icon of the crucified Man’s passion takes us back to the moment when Mary, faced with the unprecedented pain of her crucified Son, experienced the harshest test in her life and overcame it in faith. It was then that Jesus, hanging on the Cross, entrusted us to her as her children. And Mary accepted us.
Trusting in her motherly love, we now ask her to intercede for us, for our families, for the sick and the suffering, for the Church and for the city of Turin, for Italy and for the whole world.
Let us ask her in a very special way to protect the young people of Turin, especially the large group of young men and women present here who took part in the World Youth Day held in Paris last August.
With her help, may the plan of divine salvation be fulfilled in each one of us, as it was for the three new blesseds whom we contemplate today in heavenly glory.
3. Lastly, I would like to express my joy at the desire for peace and reconciliation which emerged yesterday from the referendum in Ireland. I deeply hope that those beloved peoples will continue courageously on the way they have undertaken.
PASTORAL VISIT
OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL II
TO VERCELLI AND TURIN (ITALY)
(MAY 23-24, 1998)
REGINA COELI
24 May 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. We will now sing together the Regina Caeli, a Marian prayer that lets us relive the Blessed Virgin's intense Easter joy at her Son’s Resurrection. Mary watchfully accompanies believers on their journey, and your city bears many signs of her special protection. Right before me stands the imposing church dedicated to the Great Mother of God, one of the many which the piety of Turin’s people has raised in honour of Our Lady.
How can we fail to remember the filial Marian devotion of the many saints and blesseds who come from Turin and, in particular, St John Bosco, who always had an affectionate enthusiasm for Mary, Help of Christians, whose liturgical memorial occurs today? Mary is our Mother and a true help for every Christian.
2. Today our thoughts naturally turn to the place not far from here where the Shroud is preserved. The icon of the crucified Man’s passion takes us back to the moment when Mary, faced with the unprecedented pain of her crucified Son, experienced the harshest test in her life and overcame it in faith. It was then that Jesus, hanging on the Cross, entrusted us to her as her children. And Mary accepted us.
Trusting in her motherly love, we now ask her to intercede for us, for our families, for the sick and the suffering, for the Church and for the city of Turin, for Italy and for the whole world.
Let us ask her in a very special way to protect the young people of Turin, especially the large group of young men and women present here who took part in the World Youth Day held in Paris last August.
With her help, may the plan of divine salvation be fulfilled in each one of us, as it was for the three new blesseds whom we contemplate today in heavenly glory.
3. Lastly, I would like to express my joy at the desire for peace and reconciliation which emerged yesterday from the referendum in Ireland. I deeply hope that those beloved peoples will continue courageously on the way they have undertaken.
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA COELI
17 May 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. In this Easter season, the biblical texts presented in the liturgy highlight the presence and action of the Holy Spirit in the first Christian community. The Church, founded on the Apostles’ testimony, is guided on her way through the centuries by the Holy Spirit, who spurs her onward in her mission to all the nations and cultures of the world. She does not impose human laws or traditions on them, but proclaims the Good News of Christ the Saviour and his commandment: “Love one another as I have loved you” (cf. Jn 15:12), with great respect for their cultural heritage and their religious commitment.
In this year particularly dedicated to the Spirit, we are invited to meditate on this reality with greater attention, and especially to pray with one voice to God, asking him to send his Spirit to renew the earth and comfort his people on their pilgrimage through history.
2. The Year 2000 is a fitting occasion for giving a new impetus to evangelization in the world. For this reason, Special Assemblies of the Synod of Bishops have been convoked for these last years of the second millennium. The one dedicated to Asia ended three days ago, and today I invite you to join me in giving thanks to the Lord for this historic ecclesial event, which not only concerned that vast, ancient continent but the universal Church as well. It was an event of communion and mutual knowledge, an occasion to exchange gifts and face important pastoral challenges.
The Bishops and the other members of the assembly have now returned, or are returning, to their communities. In Asia’s various geographic and social situations, the Holy Spirit will help them to travel the ways he indicated during the Synod, so that the good seed of the Gospel may be scattered everywhere in abundance and bear fruits of eternal salvation.
3. To this end we invoke the intercession of Mary, an image of the Church, who was always guided by the Spirit. Mary’s presence in the Church is a pledge and guarantee of the gift of the Spirit, who conceived the Saviour in her at Nazareth and gave life to the Church newly born on Pentecost, so that the work of Redemption might be spread to the very ends of the earth. To her we entrust the mission of believers in Asia, together with the expectations and hopes of all humanity.
The Holy Father then prayed for the Indonesian people after the recent outbreak of violence in their country:
We look with deep concern at what is happening in Indonesia. The violence of the past few days has caused the death of many people as well as enormous destruction, putting the entire country in great danger.
At this time our full human and Christian solidarity is extended to that noble nation. Let us pray that the common good of all the Indonesian people may be ensured through dialogue and mutual respect for persons and laws.
  © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CAELI
Sunday 10 May 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. At the end of this solemn celebration, I would like to stress the Marian devotion that inspired these new blesseds. Following their shining example, we too would like to renew our filial trust in the Mother of Christ, so that she may guide us on the path of total fidelity to Christ and his Gospel.
2. I joyfully greet the pilgrims from Spain and, in particular, the relatives of the 11 blesseds, the Bishops of their Dioceses of origin and the authorities who have wished to take part in this solemn ceremony.
I ask God that the marvellous example of these women, who shed their blood for Christ and forgave their executioners from the heart, may sustain the firm resolution of Spanish society to live in peace and freedom, and may soften the hearts of those who today still use terror and violence to impose their ideas. To all I impart my Blessing, which I extend to your families, to the elderly and the sick and also to the women religious of the enclosed monasteries connected with the new blesseds.
3. I cordially greet the Lebanese from Lebanon and the diaspora who have come to Rome for the beatification of Fr Kassab Al-Hardini. My greetings go first to the President of the Lebanese Republic, to the ecclesiastical authorities, to the civil and religious dignitaries and to all the brothers of the Lebanese Maronite Order, as well as to the family members of the new blessed and those who have obtained favours through his intercession. May Bl. Al-Hardini revive the faith, sustain the Christian life and strengthen the witness of Christ's disciples in Lebanon, on the threshold of the third millennium!
4. I now greet the Italian-speaking pilgrims who have come for the beatifications. I also greet those participating in the “Walk for Solidarity”, led by the Minister of Health and a group of young patients from Bambino Gesù Hospital, and made up of the associations for patients waiting for transplants or who have had them, as well as volunteer associations, including AIDO. To everyone, a word of affection and cordial encouragement.
Lastly, I would like to address an affectionate thought to the people of Ecuador where hundreds have died or are missing because of floods and landslides, as well as those in Campania, Italy, who have been sorely tried by the recent devastating mudslides, with numerous victims and enormous damage to homes and land. I assure them of my prayers for the deceased and I am close to their relatives in full Christian solidarity. I likewise pray for the missing, for the homeless and for those involved in the difficult rescue operations, so that a solution may be found as soon as possible for these tragic emergency situations which cause me such deep concern.
Upon everyone I invoke the strength and motherly protection of Mary, Comfort of the Afflicted and Mother of Hope.
  © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CAELI
Sunday, 3 May 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today we are celebrating the World Day of Prayer for Vocations. It occurs on this Fourth Sunday of Easter, also called “Good Shepherd Sunday”, because in the liturgy the well-known passage in John’s Gospel is proclaimed which presents Christ precisely as “the good shepherd” who “lays down his life for the sheep” (Jn 10:11).
In this particularly significant liturgical setting, I had the joy this morning of ordaining, in St Peter’s Basilica, 30 new priests for the Diocese of Rome. I invoked upon each of them the Holy Spirit, who, by a unique sacramental grace, has appointed them ministers of Christ the Good Shepherd, so that the faithful, through the word and sacraments, “may have life, and have it abundantly” (Jn 10:10).
I invite everyone to pray for these young priests, and to pray that in Rome and throughout the world there will be many who generously answer the Lord’s call by laying down their own lives in service to the Gospel.
2. Labour Day, which was observed on 1 May in various parts of the world, had great importance. It was a fitting occasion for reflecting on the meaning of work in the life of the individual and of society.
On that day especially, I brought before God in prayer the problems that currently trouble the world of work: unemployment, underemployment, the exploitation of child labour and the conditions of insecurity in which work is sometimes carried out.
I hope that political and trade-union forces will dedicate themselves with renewed commitment to seeking appropriate solutions to the problems made even more acute today by the phenomenon of globalization, so that the dignity of human work and the rights of the worker will always be respected.
3. As the month of May begins, Mary stands before us as the model of every vocation: not only of those who accept the invitation to be totally consecrated to God and to the coming of his kingdom, but also of those who intend to bear witness to their faith in married and professional life.
Our Lady, as well as Christ himself, lived both these aspects of human activity in an extraordinary, perfect combination. As Joseph’s wife and Jesus’ mother, she was a home-maker in Nazareth, involved in raising and educating her Son according to God’s will. And when he left home and the carpenter’s shop to devote himself completely to the work of salvation entrusted to him by God the Father, she followed him with deep fidelity all the way to the Cross and Resurrection, becoming the model and mother of the Church.
We turn to Mary with trust. The Lord will not fail, through the intercession of his Mother, to raise up many holy vocations to serve the kingdom of God in our time.
Appeal for Peace
Tomorrow, 4 May, important meetings will be held in London to overcome the serious difficulties being encountered by the peace process between the State of Israel and the Palestinians.
I join the sentiments of those who have proposed and accepted this initiative, in the profound hope that the two parties and those involved in helping them will cherish a strong desire to return to the way of dialogue and understanding. Once again I remind everyone that, for the Palestinian and Israeli peoples, there is only one way they can take: that of peace, respect, justice and co-operation.
Let us fervently pray that God will enlighten those taking part in these important meetings.
© Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CAELI
Sunday, 26 April 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. In this liturgical season of Easter, which goes from Easter Sunday to Pentecost Sunday, the joyful song of Alleluia is heard over and over again in the assembly of believers. It is in an invitation to offer praise for Christ’s victory over sin and death.
This season is also the time of year when we recall the Church’s origins, revisiting the history of that group of disciples who, after meeting the risen Jesus, received the Holy Spirit with power and became courageous preachers of the Gospel in the world.
These days, as we read the Acts of the Apostles and retrace the Church’s first steps, how can we not recall that the Special Assembly for Asia of the Synod of Bishops is taking place in Rome? The Asian shore of the Mediterranean was the cradle of Christianity. After 2,000 years the Church is asking herself about her presence in Asia, and with her gaze turned to that immense continent where three fourths of humanity lives, she listens again to Christ’s words: “Go and make disciples of all nations ... teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you; and lo, I am with you always, to the close of the age” (Mt 28:19-20).
2. We are also told in the Acts of the Apostles that the Mother of the Risen One was present at the centre of the newborn apostolic community: “All these with one accord devoted themselves to prayer, together with the women and Mary, the mother of Jesus” (Acts 1:14).
Just as she was intimately joined at the foot of the cross to Christ’s redeeming sacrifice, so Mary is the silent witness among the Apostles in the Upper Room. In a certain sense, she enlivens their faith and their prayer. She supports and encourages them, as with one voice they call upon the Holy Spirit promised by Jesus. This image of the first community at prayer, in expectation of Pentecost, must always remain before our eyes, especially in this year dedicated to the Holy Spirit, in order to sustain our journey of faith and apostolate.
3. Dear brothers and sisters, let us spend the Easter season in fervent and constant prayer to the Spirit, supported and guided by the Blessed Virgin, Mother of Good Counsel. May Mary obtain the gifts of the Lord’s Spirit for all believers, especially for those involved in the Synod, so that the Church will continue to make rapid progress in Asia and the third millennium will mark a flourishing new season for the Gospel among the noble nations of that vast continent.
  © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CAELI
Second Sunday of Easter, 19 April 1998
    Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. In today’s Gospel passage we read that Jesus appeared to the Apostles in the Upper Room and said to them: “Receive the Holy Spirit. If you forgive the sins of any, they are forgiven; if you retain the sins of any, they are retained” (Jn 20:22-23). With these words, the risen Christ calls the Apostles to be messengers and ministers of his merciful love and from that day, from generation to generation, this proclamation of hope has resounded in the heart of the Church for every believer. Blessed are those who open their hearts to divine mercy! The Lord’s merciful love precedes and accompanies every act of evangelization and enriches it with extraordinary fruits of conversion and spiritual renewal.
2. In every corner of the world the way of the Christian people is marked by the constant action of divine mercy. This happened in the early communities and likewise in the Church’s later developments on the various continents. Today our attention is focused in particular on the signs of mercy which God worked and contines to work in Asia. In fact this morning’s solemn Eucharistic celebration in St Peter’s Basilica opened the Special Assembly for Asia of the Synod of Bishops.
The theme chosen for this Synod Assembly is “Jesus Christ the Saviour and his Mission of Love and Service in Asia: ‘that they may have life, and have it abundantly’ (Jn 10:10)”. This is a most appropriate theme for Asia, especially in view of its many religions and cultures, its variety of economic and political situations. It is an enormous land, open to the proclamation of salvation in Jesus Christ and to the witness of Christian solidarity towards peoples who are often sorely tried. At this time I am thinking particularly of the peoples of North Korea, exhausted by hunger and hardship: as I urge the Church’s charitable organizations to take responsibility for this difficult situation, I hope that the international community will also provide the necessary assistance.
3. Let us entrust to Mary, Mother of the Church, the work of the Special Assembly for Asia of the Synod of Bishops. May she, who was at the heart of of the apostolic community as a teacher of prayer and communion, obtain an abundant outpouring of the Holy Spirit on the Synod Fathers and on all the Christian communities throughout the Asian continent. May Our Lady, Mother of Divine Mercy, also enable us to accept with open hearts the gift of merciful love that the risen Christ offers all believers, so that his mercy and his peace may mark the present and the future of all humanity.
  © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CAELI
Easter Monday, 13 April 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today’s liturgy prolongs our Easter joy, inviting us to rejoice in the Lord, because “Christ has become our paschal sacrifice”. Today it is an angel who guides us in our reflection on the mystery of Jesus’ Resurrection. “Why do you seek the living among the dead?”, he says to the women who had gone to the tomb (cf. Lk 24:5). Since that day the same question has continued down the centuries to our time. The angel invites us not to seek the living among the dead. We can gather two teachings from his words. First of all, the exhortation never to tire of seeking the risen Chist, who gives abundant life to those who meet him. Finding Christ means discovering peace of heart, as the experience of so many converts attests. The women in the Gospel, after their initial experience, feel deep joy at finding the Teacher alive (cf. Mt 28:8-9). I hope that all will have the same spiritual experience, welcoming into their hearts, their homes and their families the joyful message of Easter: “Christ now raised from the dead will never die again; death no longer has power over him, alleluia” (Communion antiphon).
2. But there is a second teaching we can draw from the angel’s words. When he urges the women not to seek “the living among the dead”, he wants us to understand that Christ — the living God who shines with glory — can be better known by his disciples now than before his passion and death. Now he gives his disciples the Holy Spirit, who can guide them “into all the truth” (Jn 16:13). The Spirit, the first gift of the Risen One to believers (cf. Jn 20:22), helps them in their weakness, leading them to “know fully the mystery of Redemption and to preach the rule of faith in all truth” (Peter Damian, Carmina et preces, III).
3. Dear brothers and sisters, let us invoke the Queen of Heaven, who certainly did not fail to meet her risen Son and was able joyfully to continue her conversation with him. May Mary obtain for all the faithful the gift of a joyful and consistent witness, which will lead many others to meet and know the risen Lord, who lives always among us.
Afterwards the Pope prayed for peace in Northern Ireland and greeted the various pilgrims.
I wish to invite you to thank God for the positive results achieved a few days ago in Northern Ireland. They allow us to look with greater confidence at the future of those dear communities which have suffered for so long.
Let us pray to the Lord that each individual will listen to his conscience and have the courage to perform responsible and concrete acts which will enable everyone to advance together on the way of peace, avoiding anything that could cause a return to hatred and violence.
On this Easter Monday, I am pleased to greet the choirs from the United States taking part in the Umbria Jazz Easter Festival in Terni, and I thank them for their praise of God in song. Upon all the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors who have joined us in praying the Regina Caeli I invoke the risen Saviour’s gifts of joy and peace. Happy Easter!
  © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Palm Sunday, 5 April 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
The action which will soon be repeated in this square has a particular meaning. French young people will hand the great pilgrim Cross over to their Italian brothers and sisters. This Cross will preside over the World Youth Day to be held in Rome during August of the Year 2000.
Dear Italian young people, this Cross will travel on an itinerant mission to your cities and Dioceses; you will gather round it to make a symbolic pilgrimage to the Year 2000. Welcome it into your hearts and your lives; let it challenge you by its message of death and resurrection; become its conscious and responsible witnesses to your peers.
I extend a cordial greeting to the French delegation led by Cardinal JeanMarie Lustiger, Archbishop of Paris. With deep joy I thank the Lord for the meeting in Paris, which was a time of great fervour, a sign of hope and an occasion of spiritual and fraternal life. The celebration of Baptism, the catecheses and the contemplation of the Lord’s mysteries enabled the participants to deepen and affirm their faith, in order to be its generous witnesses.
Today, dear young people of France, in handing the World Youth Day Cross over to the young people of Rome, you are performing a significant act. You are recalling that faith in Christ and communion in the Church are brought about by a mutual exchange and by witness to the One who is our salvation, our hope and our happiness: Jesus of Nazareth. Bring to your young compatriots the greetings and encouragement of the Pope, who is counting on you to proclaim the Gospel!
I greet with affection the young people present in St Peter’s Square today, and all those following this World Youth Day on radio and television. We have watched the Cross being passed from the young people of France to the young people of Italy, in preparation for the next World Youth Day, to be held here in Rome. The Cross of Christ speaks to the young people of today about the meaning of life and death, of time and eternity. Be witnesses before the world to the grace of Jesus Christ! I affectionately greet the Spanishspeaking young people. You have seen how the French young people passed the Cross to the Italians for the gathering of the Year 2000. You also must carry it as a message of love on all the paths of the world. I am thinking of the American young people gathered at the Continental Meeting in Santiago, Chile.
I entrust you to Our Lady of Guadalupe, Mother and Queen of America, so that this meeting may be an occasion for spiritual growth, for the sharing of values, for brotherhood and for commitment to building the civilization of love.
I very cordially greet the young people from German-speaking countries. The Cross, which is passed on to you, should be a sign and reminder for you to focus your whole life on the Word that is preached, so that the world may believe because of your authentic witness.
I greet the Portuguese-speaking young people. Open your hearts to the light of the Holy Spirit and carry the Cross of Christ, spreading its hope to your homes and society. May this World Youth Day strengthen your apostolic zeal for the true happiness of those around you, in the likeness of Mary, Mother of the Church.
I greet the Polish young people present here in St Peter’s Square and all the young people in the homeland. I thank you for taking part in this great pilgrimage of the Cross of Christ connected with the World Youth Days. Faithfully and courageously follow this Cross. Be apostles of the new evangelization and a sign of hope in today’s world.
  © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 29 March 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today the liturgy for the Fifth Sunday of Lent offers us a passage from John’s Gospel in which Christ meets a woman caught in adultery. The Lord does not condemn her; in fact he saves her from being stoned. He does not say, “You have not sinned”, but, “Neither do I condemn you; go, and do not sin again” (cf. Jn 8:11). Only Christ can truly save man, because he assumes the burden of man's sin and offers him the possibility of changing.
This Gospel passage clearly teaches that Christian forgiveness is not synonymous with mere tolerance, but implies something more demanding. It does not mean overlooking evil, or even worse, denying it. God does not forgive evil but the individual, and he teaches us to distinguish the evil act, which as such must be condemned, from the person who has committed it, to whom he offers the possibility of changing. While man tends to identify the sinner with his sin, closing every escape, the heavenly Father instead has sent his Son into the world to offer everyone a way to salvation. Christ is this way: dying on the Cross, he has redeemed us from our sins.
To the men and women of every age, Jesus repeats: “Neither do I condemn you; go, and do not sin again” (cf. Jn 8:11).
2. How could we see ourselves in this Gospel without feeling a surge of confidence? How could we not recognize it as “good news” for the men and women of our day, who long to rediscover the true sense of mercy and pardon?
There is a need for Christian forgiveness, which instills hope and trust without weakening the struggle against evil. There is a need to give and receive mercy.
But we cannot forgive if we do not let God forgive us first, recognizing that it is we who are the object of his mercy. We will be ready to forgive the debts of others only if we become aware of the enormous debt that we ourselves have been forgiven.
3. The Christian people call upon Mary as Mother of Mercy. In her, God’s merciful love became incarnate and her Immaculate Heart is always and everywhere a safe refuge for sinners.
With her to guide us, we hasten our steps towards Jerusalem, towards the Passover of our salvation, which is now at hand. We follow the Son who goes to meet his passion and also says to us: “Go, and do not sin again” (Jn 8:11). The universal judgement of God’s love is passed on Golgotha, so that each may recognize that Christ crucified has paid the price of our ransom. May Our Lady help us to receive the gift of salvation with renewed joy, so that we may find the trust and hope to walk in newness of life.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
Next Thursday, as is now traditional, I will meet the young people of Rome in preparation for World Youth Day, which will be celebrated in all the local Churches on Palm Sunday.
This year’s meeting will take place for the first time in Piazza San Giovanni. It has a special significance, because it is a preparation for the arrival of the World Youth Day Cross. This Cross, after leaving Rome in 1985, has made stops in the six cities where the World Youth Meetings with the Pope have taken place — Buenos Aires, Santiago de Compostela, Czêstochowa, Denver, Manila, Paris — and it is now returning to us for the Youth Jubilee of the Year 2000.
I therefore expect the young people of Rome to come in large numbers on Thursday afternoon, 2 April, for this important gathering.
© Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
APOSTOLIC JOURNEY
OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL II
TO NIGERIA (MARCH 21-23, 1997)
ANGELUS
Onitsha, Nigeria
Sunday, 22 March 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters in Christ,
Having offered the holy and acceptable Sacrifice — the same which Blessed Cyprian Michael Iwene Tansi offered throughout his priestly life — and having been nourished with the Lord's own Body and Blood, we turn in prayer to the Blessed Virgin Mary as we recite together the Angelus.
Mary Most Holy, Mother of the Redeemer, we are preparing to celebrate the two thousandth anniversary of the coming on earth of your Son Jesus, who is Emmanuel, God-with-us. Thus we are reminded that God does not abandon his people. No matter what problems or difficulties we may encounter, you teach us to place our trust and hope firmly in the Lord. In him we have the courage and the strength not only to persevere in adverse situations, but also to work actively so that such situations might be overcome and made right again.
Blessed Virgin, Mother of the redeemed, we commend to you the sons and daughters of the Church, which is "the Family of the Father, the Brotherhood of the Son, the Image of the Trinity" (Ecclesia in Africa, 144). We entrust to your maternal care the sick and the lonely, the poor and the hungry, the refugee, the prisoner, the old whose dreams have not been realized, the young whose aspirations are in danger of not being fulfilled. To you, Queen of Nigeria, we commend every citizen of this land who hungers and thirsts for justice.
The Angel of the Lord . . .
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 15 March 1998
    Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The solemn celebration at which I had the joy of proclaiming three new blesseds has just ended. I affectionately greet all the pilgrims who have come from various countries to honour these heralds of the faith whom today we contemplate in the glory of God.
We give thanks to God for the splendid witness given to the Gospel by our brother and sisters, who are held up today for the veneration and imitation of the Christian people. In their lives they constantly and intensely called on the motherly intercession of Mary, whose devoted and faithful children they always declared themselves to be.
2. In the Immaculate Mother of God Brigida Morello found inspiration and support for her work of Christian formation and the advancement of women, of evangelization and the quest for the unity of the Church.
Mother Carmen Sallés was inspired in her educational work by Mary, the perfect creature, since she was full of grace and totally free from sin. For this reason she founded the Institute of the Missionary Teaching Sisters of the Immaculate Conception, who today have spread to 12 countries across the world.
Throughout his life Bl. Vincent Eugene Bossilkov, a Passionist, Bishop and martyr, lived a humble and docile attachment to the Mother of the Lord. In harsh trials he stressed Mary’s goodness and immense capacity for suffering, writing: “It is truly impossible to be indifferent to the Blessed Virgin’s great tenderness and purity, to the Mother’s great love and abandonment, and to the great patience and resignation of the woman of sorrows!” (Spiritual Exercises, p. 52).
The words and particularly the life of the three new blesseds are further evidence that wherever men and women take the path of holiness, Mary is there to repeat the invitation she made one day at the wedding in Cana: “Do whatever he tells you” (Jn 2:5).
May the new blesseds help us to understand this exhortation, especially as we live this season of Lent, a favourable time for the renewal of our hearts and our lives.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims and visitors who had come for the beatifications:
I affectionately greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims who have joined the Marian prayer of the Angelus, especially the Conceptionist Sisters, the Bishops and civil authorities, as well as the many faithful who have joyfully attended the ceremony at which Mother María of Mt Carmel Sallés y Barangueras was raised to the glory of the altars. I invite you to follow the new blessed’s example, ever trusting in the Blessed Virgin Mary on your way to her divine Son. I warmly bless you all.
I extend a heartfelt greeting to the pilgrims who have come for the beatification of Vincent Eugene Bossilkov and Brigida of Jesus Morello, with a special thought for the Passionists and the Ursuline Sisters of Mary Immaculate. May the example and intercession of the new blesseds spur everyone to greater Gospel generosity.
I extend a cordial greeting to the superiors, brothers and students of the Collegium Germanicum et Hungaricum. In accordance with a long-standing tradition, today you made the Seven Church Pilgimage on foot. I am pleased to grant you the Apostolic Blessing as you continue on your way.
I extend a special greeting to the large group of Brazilian priests, religious and lay people present here. May your Lenten pilgrimage to the Roman basilicas renew your faith in Jesus Christ, who redeemed us out of love and called us to be God’s children and to live as brothers and sisters in justice and peace. I give you all my heartfelt Blessing, which I extend to your family members and friends.
    © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 8 March 1998
   1. Today “Woman’s Day” is being celebrated in many countries of the world. It is an important event which invites us to reflect on women’s role in society, and even prior to that, in God’s plan. Recognition of this role has encountered numerous obstacles in history. Even today it cannot be said that all resistance has been overcome.
I gladly take this opportunity to express the hope that woman’s equal dignity will at last be fully recognized and her particular gifts adequately appreciated. Man and woman complement each other not only physically and psychologically at the level of behaviour, but more profoundly at the level of being. Everyone knows Catholic doctrine on this subject, which I have often had occasion to recall, especially in my Apostolic Letter Mulieris dignitatem and the Letter to Women.
2. We are unfortunately heirs to a history of enormous conditioning that has hindered the progress of women: their dignity is sometimes ignored, their special qualities misrepresented and they themselves are frequently marginalized. This has prevented them from being truly themselves and has deprived the whole human race of authentic spiritual riches.
How many women have been and are still valued more for their physical appearance than for their personal qualities, professional competence, intellectual work, the richness of their sensitivity and, finally, for the very dignity of their being!
And what can be said then of the obstacles that in so many parts of the world still prevent women from being fully involved in social, political and economic life? In this regard, while recalling that the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is being celebrated this year, I wish to make an appeal on behalf of women whose basic rights are still denied today by the political regimes of their countries: women who are segregated, forbidden to study or to exercise a profession, or even to express their thoughts in public. May international solidarity hasten the due recognition of their rights.
3. May Mary, the model of a fulfilled woman, help everyone, especially all women, to understand the “feminine genius”, not only to carry out God’s precise plan, but also to make more room for woman in the various areas of social life.
May Mary present to the Lord the expectations and prayers, the commitment and sufferings of all the women of the world, and may she show her motherly concern to every man and woman on the path of life.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father appealed for a prompt resolution of the violent conflict in Kosovo
At this time we are deeply concerned about the critical situation that has developed in Kosovo, where outbursts of violence once again threaten the efforts for dialogue and peace.
As I express my heartfelt solidarity with those who are suffering, mourning the death of their loved ones and fearing for the future, I wish to appeal to the goodwill of all that no effort be spared in seeking timely solutions that respect the freedom and rights of those beloved peoples.
May the Blessed Virgin watch over them all.
    © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 1 March 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Last Wednesday, with the traditional rite of ashes, we entered the austere penitential atmosphere of Lent. This liturgical season, which recalls the 40 days Jesus spent in the desert, is a pressing invitation to conversion for all the baptized, so that inwardly renewed they may celebrate Easter, the solemn memorial of salvation. During this year dedicated especially to the Holy Spirit, I would like to recall, as the Gospel texts emphasize, that it is precisely the Spirit who leads Christ into the desert (cf. Lk 4:1) to be tempted by the devil. The Christian, whose life is guided by this same Spirit received in Baptism and Confirmation, is called to fight, with the support of Christ’s grace, the daily battle of faith. Lent is the “favourable” season for a deep examination of one’s own life in the light of God’s Word.
2. This year Lent has a particular meaning for the Diocese of Rome. Indeed, it is a time of Mission. As I had the opportunity to recall at my traditional meeting with the Roman clergy last Thursday, the City Mission is reaching its culmination. In fact, the family visits are under way in many parishes, while the awaited Jubilee of the Year 2000 is rapidly approaching. Today I would like to repeat to every inhabitant of our city: “Open the door to Christ, your Saviour!”. These very words form the theme of the City Mission. My wish is that they will be heard by every family of the Diocese.
3. Lastly, I would like to invite you to thank the Lord with me for the successful conclusion of the Baghdad agreement, in the hope that the threat of recourse to arms may be avoided once and for all. A particular word of appreciation also goes to the UN Secretary-General and to all those who in this difficult crisis have wanted to believe in human goodwill. Their diplomatic sucess is certainly a victory for the international community. The situation is still sensitive and complex, but there is strong hope that God will continue to enlighten all who are concerned about the fate of the Iraqi people and peace in the Middle East. Let us entrust these wishes to Mary most holy, Queen of Peace, as we implore her maternal intercession.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father said in Italian:
I extend a cordial greeting to the Italian-speaking pilgrims, especially those who support the efforts of missionary institutes in Italy with the slogan: “Let us free poor countries from debt!”. With regard to this serious problem, I reaffirm the proposal to take the opportunity of this historical moment, when we are preparing for the Great Jubilee, to reduce substantially, if not cancel outright, the international debt which weighs so heavily on the future of many nations. I encourage political and economic institutions to continue and to increase their efforts to find just solutions, giving priority to those that help the people themselves to be actively involved in their country’s development. This evening, as is my custom during the first week of Lent, I will begin Spiritual Exercises, accompanied by those who work with me in the Roman Curia. I ask you to pray for me, and I urge everyone, in keeping with their work and family commitments, to find moments of silence and recollection for listening to the Lord’s voice, which risks being stifled in the whirl of daily concerns. May my Blessing also support you in this task.
To the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors the Holy Father said:
Among those present today, I welcome the students and faculty members of the John Carroll University from Ohio: may your visit to Rome help you to grow in your understanding and love of the Church.
Upon the English-speaking visitors taking part in this Angelus prayer and upon your families at home, I invoke abundant blessings of faith, hope and love. May this Lenten season be for all of you a time of prayer and good works in preparation for the joy of Easter.
    © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday 22 February 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today, the liturgical feast of the Chair of St Peter, I have had the joy of solemnly concelebrating the Eucharist with the new Cardinals created at yesterday’s Consistory, and of presenting them with a ring, the symbol of a special bond with the Successor of Peter. Today’s feast offers us the opportunity to thank God for giving the Church, in the Petrine ministry, a centre of unity in truth and charity. When Jesus, as the Gospels attest, addressed the crucial question to his disciples: “But who do you say that I am?” (Mt 16:15), it was Simon Peter who replied: “You are the Christ, the Son of the living God” (Mt 16:16). On that day Christ recognized the special charism given by the Father to the fisherman of Galilee, the charism of sincere and solid faith. For this reason he called him “Cephas”, which in Hebrew means “rock”, and promised that on this faith he would build his Church (cf. Mt 16:17-18).
Down the centuries and also today, on the threshold of the third millennium, Peter in the person of his Successors is called to confess and proclaim that Jesus is the Christ, the Saviour. The College of Bishops is united with him, and with him the College of Cardinals collaborates in a most special way.
2. Dear brothers and sisters, I accompany these new Cardinals with the prayer that spreads from St Peter’s Square to the whole world. With you I invoke upon each of them and their ministry the maternal protection of Mary, Queen of the Apostles. Let us also entrust to her the penitential path of Lent which will start next Wednesday with the solemn rite of ashes. Let us pray that every Christian and the individual ecclesial communities will be able to complete an authentic journey of conversion in preparation for the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000.
I extend a warm welcome to the English-speaking visitors taking part in our Angelus prayer. In particular I greet the pilgrims from the United States of America, Canada, Taiwan, Tanzania and Zambia who are here to honour the newly-created Cardinals. May the events of these days strengthen your faith and give you an ever more ardent love of the Church. Let us increase our prayers to the Blessed Mother for peace in the world.
I extend a cordial greeting to the French-speaking pilgrims, especially those who came from France to gather round the Archbishop of Lyons, a new Cardinal.
Dear friends, at the end of this solemn liturgy let us call upon the Mother of the Lord to help the whole Church bear witness to the Gospel in faith and love!
I greet the pilgrims from German-speaking countries who have come to the tomb of the Prince of the Apostles for the Consistory. I especially welcome the faithful from the Archdiocese of Vienna and from all of Austria who have joined in the Eucharistic celebration with their new Cardinal in St Peter’s Square.
I am pleased to welcome the pilgrims who have come from Chile, Colombia, Spain and Mexico to take joyful part in the celebrations in which four Pastors of these Spanish-speaking countries have been raised to the dignity of Cardinal.
I greet you all with deep affection and hope that your pilgrimage to Rome for this important occasion will strengthen your faith and make you courageous witnesses to it in your society.
I cordially greet the Portuguese-speaking pilgrims, especially the relatives and friends of the Archbishop of Belo Horizonte, Brazil, who is now a member of the College of Cardinals.
May the Blessed Virgin guide and protect your steps with maternal care, in the service of proclaiming and bearing witness to the Good News of Jesus Christ.
I cordially greet my compatriots who have come to the Public Consistory. Among the new Cardinals there is also a countryman of ours who has been a missionary in Zambia for many years. May God bless him and all Polish missionaries.
    © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
15 February 1998
     Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Yesterday we celebrated the feast of Sts Cyril and Methodius. These two ninth-century Greek brothers from Thessalonika, formed at the school of the Patriarchate of Constantinople, were dedicated to the evangelization of the peoples of Greater Moravia in the middle Danube region. Cyril and Methodius carried out their missionary service in union with the Church of Constantinople and with the See of Peter's Successor, thereby showing the unity of the Church which at that time had not yet been wounded by the division between East and West.
I would like to entrust to the intercession of these two saints the longing for full unity among all believers in Christ, especially in view of the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000. The need to make every possible effort to continue the ecumenical dialogue was strongly emphasized at the meeting a few days ago of the Central Committee for the Jubilee with the delegates of the Episcopal Conferences. May God hasten our steps towards complete reconciliation, so that the dawn of the third millennium can see Christians, if not fully united, at least closer to this goal.
2. The feast of Sts Cyril and Methodius also gives me the opportunity to remind Christians and all people of goodwill on our continent of what we could call the European challenge, that is, the need to build a Europe which is deeply mindful of its own history, seriously committed to seeing that human rights are put into practice, united with the peoples of the other continents in promoting peace and development on a global scale. However these lofty objectives cannot be pursued without a deep and constant spiritual motivation, which the citizens and nations of Europe can draw from the rich cultural heritage they share, in fruitful dialogue with other great currents of thought, as they have always done during the best moments of their 2,000-year-old civilization.
Therefore, celebrating these eminent apostles of Europe means renewing our commitment to the new evangelization of the continent, so that, in the historical transition from the second to the third millennium, its Christian roots will receive new nourishment for the benefit of all European peoples, their culture and their peaceful coexistence.
3. Through the intercession of Mary most holy, as deeply beloved and venerated in the East as in the West, may today’s Christians harmoniously co-operate in the new evangelization and may all the nations of Europe come together in a common house, each making its own contribution and putting it at the service of all.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
With great affection I extend my greeting to the many people afflicted with cancer, who with their relatives have wished to join our prayer today to implore God for relief and comfort in the difficult situation they are undergoing.
Dear friends, last Wednesday we celebrated World Day of the Sick, and we paused to reflect on the meaning and value of suffering in the light of faith. Today I again express my spiritual closeness and heartfelt encouragement: do not feel alone in your illness! The Church is close to you. I would like to invite all those in authority to join forces to prevent and successfully combat this widespread disease.
I also wish to urge Christian communities to support the sick and their famlies with concrete solidarity, so that faith in Christ may illumine them in the night of suffering and sustain their hope of healing.
   © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
8 February 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Next Wednesday, 11 February, we will celebrate the Sixth World Day of the Sick, which has been placed under the spiritual patronage of Our Lady of Lourdes, whose liturgical memorial occurs on that day. This year the celebration will take place at the Holy House in Loreto, the renowned icon of the mystery of the Incarnation and a very appropriate place in this second year of immediate preparation for the Great Jubilee, dedicated to the Holy Spirit. For this important occasion, I have appointed Cardinal Angelo Sodano, Secretary of State, as my Legate. He will go to Loreto together with the superiors of the Pontifical Council for Pastoral Assistance to Health-Care Workers. Here I cannot fail to recall the great merits of Cardinal Angelini, who was at the origin of this Council for Health-Care Workers.
2. World Day of the Sick invites everyone to reflect on the meaning and value of suffering, in the light of the Good News of Christ, of Revelation, that is, that God is not indifferent to human tragedies and trials, but on the contrary, has taken them upon himself to open for us the way to salvation. In his earthly life Christ approached suffering persons with special love. He healed the sick, consoled the afflicted, fed the hungry, freed people from deafness, blindness, leprosy and the devil, and restored the dead to life. At the height of his mission, he went to his passion and death in the awareness that precisely through the Cross he had to reach the roots of evil and carry out the work of salvation. Spurred by love, Christ suffered willingly and as an innocent man, thus proving the truth of love through the truth of suffering, a suffering that he, the God-Man, experienced with incomparable intensity. But precisely through this sacrifice, he joined suffering to love once and for all, and in this way redeemed it.
3. The first and foremost to be associated with Jesus in this mystery of suffering and love is his Mother Mary. Her sorrow is united with that of her Son. On Calvary she became a perfect model of participation in Christ’s Crucifixion. Every person is called to suffer; every person, imitating Mary, can become a co-operator in Christ’s suffering, and thus in his Redemption. This is the Good News which the Church constantly proclaims, especially through the splendid witness of so many men and women who accept with faith and live with love the physical and spiritual trials of life.
I entrust all the sick and suffering to the Blessed Virgin Mary, Salus infirmorum. May her maternal intercession obtain for everyone the consoling experience of the love of God, who infuses the light of hope even into the dark night of pain.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father called for a peaceful resolution of the situation in Iraq and asked that negotiations be continued to avert the possibilty of armed conflict:
I am following developments of the situation in Iraq with deep anxiety and I continue to hope that those responsible for the life of nations will use diplomatic means and dialogue to avoid recourse to arms in any form.
I am convinced that the parties concerned can still come to an understanding and reaffirm the principles that peacefully govern international coexistence.
The very situation existing in Iraq and the entire Middle East region teaches us that armed conflict does not resolve problems, but creates greater misunderstandings between peoples.
The Holy See can only encourage those who are endeavouring to continue the negotiations in order to avert belligerent actions and to support the way of peace.
Let us pray fervently for this.
   © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 1 February 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Pro-Life Day, organized by the Italian Episcopal Conference, is being celebrated today in Italy. This year its theme is: “Communicating life”. I join my Brother Bishops in inviting believers and all people of goodwill to reflect on the respect due to human life from its beginning in conception to its natural end. Twenty years have now passed since Pro-Life Day was established. If in some respects sensitivity to the values of life has grown in recent years, it must nevertheless be noted that there are still some very grave threats, first of which is recourse to abortion. We must continue to pray and dedicate ourselves to ensuring that the culture of life will prevail over that of death. That is why “communicating life” is necessary.
The first “communicators” of life are parents, through procreation and education; but every person is called to spread the love of life. I appeal in particular to all those who work in the mass media to convey positive messages and provide objective information on the crucial problems concerning human life and respect for its dignity.
2. At the spiritual level, consecrated persons, men and women religious and consecrated lay people, are important “communicators of life” because of their specific vocation. I wish to emphasize this because tomorrow, the feast of the Presentation of Jesus in the Temple, we will be celebrating the Second Day of Consecrated Life, which I established last year to call the attention of the faithful to this vocation, which is essential for the life of the Church and for the good of society.
Consecrated life stems from the action of the Holy Spirit and flows into the Church like a river, bathing humanity with faith, hope and love, continuing in the world the witness of the poor, chaste and obedient Christ. This witness is frequently confirmed by bloodshed. Precisely this morning I learned that Fr Vjeco Æuriæ, a Croatian missionary of the Order of Friars Minor, was killed yesterday evening in front of Holy Family Church in Kigali, Rwanda. Another victim is added to the long list of missionaries who have confirmed their love of Christ and of the African people with the sacrifice of their life.
3. Dear brothers and sisters, let us ask Mary, Mother of Christ and of the Church, to present to her Son this generous witness to the Gospel on African soil. May she who welcomed and gave birth in the flesh to the Word of life sustain the commitment of all who spend themselves in defending the human person, especially when he is defenceless, marginalized or rejected.
We ask the Blessed Virgin, the model of a life consecrated to God and to one's brethren, to guide the way of individuals and institutes of consecrated life so that they can respond with total willingness to the Lord’s call, faithful to their original charism and attentive to the deepest human needs.
After reciting the Angelus and imparting his blessing, the Holy Father said:
I extend a cordial greeting to the Cardinal Vicar and to the faithful of the Diocese of Rome, who by participating in this Angelus prayer bear witness to their efforts on behalf of life. Today a special “Week for the Family” is beginning in Rome. It will end next Saturday with a meeting in the Paul VI Auditorium at the Vatican, to which I invite all the families of the Diocese.
This morning, during my pastoral visit to the parish of the Sacred Heart of Jesus in Prati, I called on a family, to whom I gave a copy of the Acts of the Apostles. I thus began that decisive phase of the City Mission which is the “Visit to Families” throughout the city. This visit is meant as a sign of the encouragement given to families by the Pope and the Church, so that they will not be afraid to accept Christ and to walk with him on the path of life. I wish every family a successful meeting with the missionaries who will be coming to visit them.
I would now like to extend a special greeting to the teaching staff of Rome's Faculties of Medicine and Surgery and of Mathematical, Physical and Natural Sciences, who have organized a conference on the theme “The Genome and Aging: The Future of Man”, making a professional contribution to developing a new culture of life. I also greet the pilgrims present, especially the A.C.I.STOM. group from Cesena.
My cordial encouragement and an additional Blessing to all.
Thank you for your prayers during my visit to Cuba. I wish everyone a pleasant Sunday and a good week.
© Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
APOSTOLIC JOURNEY
OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL II
TO CUBA (JANUARY 21-26, 1998)
ANGELUS
Sunday, 25 January 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. After celebrating Holy Mass in this Plaza, which has witnessed the great events of Cuban history and the daily life of the peoples of this beautiful city of Havana, rightly known as Key of the New World, I greet all of you most cordially and affectionately as we prepare to recite the Angelus, the prayer in honour of Our Lady.
2. Today marks the conclusion of the Week of Prayer for Christian Unity. The desire to achieve full communion among all believers in Christ is always present in the Church as she continues on her pilgrim way, and is ever more pressing during this year dedicated to the Holy Spirit as we prepare for the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000. Harmony and unity — the object of the Church's hope and, consequently, of humanity's hope as well — are still far off; nonetheless they constitute a gift of the Holy Spirit which we must untiringly seek.
3. May the maternal presence of Our Lady of Charity of El Cobre, Queen and Patroness of Cuba, be close to every son and daughter of this land. To her, who has visited all the Dioceses and parishes, I entrust the aspirations and hopes of this noble people. I pray that she will inspire and protect the work of the new evangelization, so that Christians may live their faith with decision and fervour, and that those who have strayed may return to its practice. May Cuba live in peace and prosperity!
Virgin Mary, Mother of individual people and of whole nations! Before I return to Rome and to the tomb of St Peter, I entrust to you once more your Cuban sons and daughters! I leave here confident that they are in your maternal heart. I ask you now to show them "Jesus, the blessed fruit of your womb". Always keep your compassionate eyes on them. Through your intercession before our divine Redeemer, keep them from all harm and fill them with love of you.
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
18 January 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The annual Week of Prayer for Christian Unity starts today and its theme is: "The Spirit helps us in our weakness" (Rom 8:26). The ecumenical challange faced by all disciples of Christ first demands much prayer. A common, continual prayer so that the Spirit of Jesus, despite human weaknesses and limitations, will help Christians to cross the threshold of the new millennium, "if not completely united, at least much closer to overcoming the divisions of the second millennium" (Tertio millennio adveniente, n. 34). We must not be resigned to these divisions. Instead, we must dare with the boldness of those who trust in God's help and use every means to take the path of sincere and respectful dialogue.
We are in the second year of preparation for the Jubilee. It is the year dedicated to the Holy Spirit, who is truly the principal agent of every effort towards full unity. It is he, in fact, who makes present in every age the unique Revelation brought by Christ to humanity, making it alive and active in the heart of each individual and of the whole Church. Therefore, "in these last years of the milliennium, the Church should invoke the Holy Spirit with ever greater insistence, imploring from him the grace of Chrisian unity" (ibid.).
2. I now have the joy of announcing that on 21 February next, the eve of the feast of St Peter's Chair, I will hold a Consistory in which I will appoint 20 new Cardinals. Here are their names:
- Archbishop Jorge Arturo Medina Estévez, Archbishop emeritus of Valparaíso, Chile, Pro-Prefect of the Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments;
- Archbishop Alberto Bovone, titular Archbishop of Caesarea in Numidia, Pro-Prefect of the Congregation for the Causes of Saints;
- Archbishop Darío Castrillón Hoyos, Archbishop of Bucaramanga, Colombia, Pro-Prefect of the Congregation for the Clergy;
- Archbishop Lorenzo Antonetti, titular Archbishop of Roselle, Pro-President of the Administration of the Patrimony of the Apostolic See;
- Archbishop James Francis Stafford, Archbishop emeritus of Denver, USA, President of the Pontifical Council for the Laity;
- Archbishop Salvatore De Giorgi of Palermo, Italy;
- Archbishop Serafim Fernandes de Araújo of Belo Horizonte, Brazil;
- Archbishop Antonio María Rouco Varela of Madrid, Spain;
- Archbishop Aloysius Matthew Ambrozic of Toronto, Canada;
- Archbishop Jean Balland of Lyons, France;
- Archbishop Dionigi Tettamanzi of Genoa, Italy;
- Archbishop Polycarp Pengo of Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania
- Archbishop Christoph Schönborn, O.P. of Vienna, Austria;
- Archbishop Norberto Rivera Carrera of Mexico City, Mexico;
- Archbishop Francis Eugene George, O.M.I. of Chicago, USA;
- Bishop Paul Shan Kuo-hsi, S.J. of Kaohsiung, Taiwan;
- Archbishop Adam Kozłowiecki, S.J., titular Archbishop of Potenza Picena, missionary in Zambia. In derogation from the numerical limit set by Pope Paul VI in the Apostolic Constitution Romano Pontifici eligendo (cf. n. 33), I intend to elevate three other prelates to the purple, in this way showing them my appreciation of their dedicated service to the Holy See:
- Archbishop Giovanni Cheli, titular Archbishop of Santa Giusta, President of the Pontifical Council for the Pastoral Care of Migrants and Itinerant People;
- Archbishop Francesco Colasuonno, titular Archbishop of Truentum, Apostolic Nuncio in Italy;
- Bishop Dino Monduzzi, titular Bishop of Capri, Prefect of the Papal Household. I also had Archbishop Giuseppe Uhaè, Secretary of the Congregation for the Evangelization of Peoples, on the list. He was informed of his appoitment three days ago, but this morning the Lord called him to himself. I have also reserved "in pectore" the appointment of two prelates as Cardinal. This group of new Cardinals from various parts of the world is an eloquent reflection of the Church's universality: it includes prelates who have been praiseworthy in the service of the Holy See and in the pastoral ministry, generously spending their energies in their different fields of activity.
3. Let us entrust these newly chosen Cardinals to the motherly protection of Mary most holy, imploring her assistance for their persons and for their respective ecclesiastical duties. Through the intercession of the Blessed Virgin may they always bear witness with courage and Gospel integrity to their love for Christ and the Church.
After the Angelus
Seven months have passed since the day when Giuseppe Soffiantini, a Brescian businessman, was kidnapped from his home in Manerbio. I make a heartfelt appeal to those who have been holding our brother prisoner for so long, asking them in God’s name to return him at last to the embrace of his loved ones. I would also like to express my spiritual closeness to his relatives and to assure them of a remembrance in my prayer. With great affection I greet the boys and girls of Rome who have come to St Peter’s Square for the Feast of Peace, organized by Catholic Action and open to children from the city’s schools and parish groups.
Dear friends, this year you have wished to portray the “City of Peace”: I encourage you to build this city every day of your lives. I know that you want to make your contribution to Rome’s City Mission with the “Children’s Mission”. I urge you put all your enthusiasm into this project, from which we expect so much good for our city. Now, along with two of your representatives, we will release two doves as a sign of the peace that children are committed to fostering in their neighbourhoods and their city. I extend my greeting to all the pilgrims present; I wish you a pleasant Sunday and ask you to accompany me with your prayers on my forthcoming apostolic visit to Cuba. I extend a particular greeting to the combined choirs from Chicago, who are here today to praise God in song. Take my blessing back with you to your families and parishes.
Upon all the English-speaking visitors I cordially invoke the joy and peace of Jesus Christ the Lord.
The Holy Father then spoke extemporaneously to the children, thanking them for their prayers and remarking on the fact that the doves did not fly away, but remained on his windowsill.
Many thanks for your contribution. Let us really hope that with your prayers I can not only go to Cuba but also return. Praised be Jesus Christ! Goodbye! You see that the doves love this house, which is a house of peace.
   © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
11 January 1998
    Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today the Church celebrates the feast of Jesus’ Baptism, which concludes the Christmas season. The Gospel relates that Jesus began his public life by being baptized by John the Baptist in the Jordan River. In this way he wished to be associated with his many compatriots who performed this act of purification and preparation for the messianic kingdom. His decision seems disconcerting, to the point that John himself does not understand it and at first refuses to baptize him. He will do it only after Jesus insists. The latter wishes to fulfil all righteousness in the Father’s sight (cf. Mt 3:15) as an expression of his solidarity with sinners, since he is the Lamb of God who came to take upon himself and to take away the sin of the world (Jn 1:29). See, the Spirit descends upon him as he is absorbed in prayer, and at that moment “a voice came from heaven, ‘You are my beloved Son; with you I am well pleased’” (Lk 3:22).
2. This year I again had the joy this morning of administering the sacrament of Baptism to a group of infants in the Sistine Chapel: 10 boys and nine girls from Italy, Mexico, Brazil and Poland. I join you in thanking the Lord for these little ones and for every new life! Every baby who comes into the world is an “epiphany” of God, a gift of life, hope and joy. In every baptized person the Church sees, together with the gift of life, the wonder of faith renewed; she discerns its perennial re-blossoming in her children and perceives the mystery of salvation which is for all people. I pray for the unborn and for the children of every nation on earth: may each of them be welcomed and loved. And I pray for adult Christians so that, ever conscious of the value of the Baptism and Confirmation they have received, they may nurture the faith inherited from their parents and see themselves as living stones of the spiritual edifice which is the Church.
3. To Mary, Mother of all who are reborn to new life by the Holy Spirit, we entrust the children I have just baptized and their families. To her, Mother of the Church, we entrust the catechumens who in many parts of the world are preparing to receive Baptism, so that they can courageously and faithfully undertake their baptismal commitments and be examples of righteousness and Gospel generosity.
At the end of the Christmas season and the beginning of the new year, I again extend my best wishes to everyone through the intercession of the Mother of God.
   © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
6 January 1998
    1. Today the Church is celebrating the Epiphany of the Lord, as she recalls the Magi who came from the East to Bethlehem, following the star. Today we contemplate the “manifestation” of Christ, who in the story of the Magi is revealed as the One God sent into the world to bring salvation to people of every nation, language and culture. He brings this mission to fulfilment by his Death and Resurrection, confirming that he is the authentic King of justice and peace. Christ hands on to the Church the very mission he received from the Father: “As the Father has sent me, even so I send you” (Jn 20:21), the Risen One says to the Apostles; and, with the symbolic gesture of breathing on them, he adds: “Receive the Holy Spirit” (Jn 20:22). In this year dedicated especially to the Holy Spirit, how can we fail to stress that it is precisely the Spirit who is the principal agent of the Church's mission (cf. Redemptoris missio, n. 21)? Thus it was for the Apostles at Pentecost; thus it was down the ages for Christ’s disciples, whom the Spirit made witnesses and prophets, instilling in them the courage to transmit honestly to others faith in Jesus, true man and true God. Today too, under the Spirit’s action, the faith is definitely open to the nations, and the witness to Christ is spreading to the very ends of the earth.
2. It is in this perspective that this year too, on the Solemnity of Epiphany, I have had the joy of conferring episcopal ordination on several priests, nine to be precise, during the solemn Eucharistic celebration which has just ended in St Peter’s Basilica. I invoked the Holy Spirit on them so that, like the Apostles, they will be courageous heralds of the Gospel and wise and faithful leaders of God’s People. I now entrust them to your prayers as well, as I give thanks with you to the Lord, who continually gives his Church new Pastors. The new evangelization is an immense field. “Our own time, with humanity on the move and in continual search, demands a resurgence of the Church's missionary activity” (Redemptoris missio, n. 30).
3. Let us implore the Blessed Virgin always to help the Church in fulfilling her mission. We call on her with a particular thought for our brothers and sisters of the Eastern Churches, many of whom are celebrating the Lord’s Birth today. We offer them our heartfelt wishes for a Holy Christmas. This wish is also extended to all other Christians of the various traditions and confessions throughout the world. May the holy Mother of God help us on our way to full communion among all Christ’s disciples, so that the proclamation of the Gospel to the generations of the new millennium may be ever more effective.
   © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 6 September 1998
    Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. With the beginning of the month of September, our working life starts up again with its normal activities: businesses, offices and schools return to their usual pace. For many this is a time of “planning”: problems are faced, objectives defined and the means and strategies to achieve them decided.
I would like to remind everyone of a basic principle of faith: prior to and beyond our projects there is a mystery of love which surrounds and guides us: the mystery of God’s love. If we want to give good direction to our life, we must learn to discern its plan, by reading the mysterious “road signs” God puts in our daily history. For this purpose neither horoscopes nor fortune-telling is useful. What is needed is prayer, authentic prayer, which should always accompany a life decision made in conformity with God’s law.
During this year, which in preparation for the Great Jubilee is dedicated in a particular way to the Holy Spirit, may our insistent prayer be directed to him. He is invoked as the Spirit of “counsel” and “wisdom”. No one knows our future better than he or is more capable of guiding our steps in the right direction.
2. Criteria are essential to good planning. Some are dictated by the actual situation: these are criteria of necessity, of opportunity, of effectiveness. But let us take care not to reduce everything to material questions. Let us not limit ourselves to technology and bureaucracy. If we wish to make truly “human” plans,  in our programmes we must include the range of great moral and spiritual values. We must also strive to look at those beside us, especially those dependent on us or at any rate affected by our decisions, always considering them as persons and never as numbers or things.
In a word, let us organize our lives — personal and community — in a way not inspired by selfishness but by love. Let us be open to our brothers and sisters, especially those who because of their condition — I am thinking of children, the sick, the elderly, the unemployed — are obliged to depend on others for many things or for everything. Therefore, let our planning also be an act of solidarity.
3. Let us ask the Blessed Virgin to obtain true “wisdom of heart” for us, so that we may plan our lives well and resume our activities with vigour. May she who is called “Mother of Good Counsel” in the Litany of Loreto suggest good ideas to us and help us to order our lives in accordance with God’s plan.
After reciting the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted those present in various languages. To the English-speaking he said:
I cordially welcome the students of the University of Dallas, beginning a semester of studies here in Rome. My greetings also go to the group of pilgrims from Singapore. Upon all the English-speaking visitors I invoke an abundance of divine blessings.
    © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 4 January 1998
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Yesterday I went to Annifo, Cesi and Assisi to visit the peoples of Umbria and the Marches who are still suffering from the consequences of the earthquake, now aggravated by the winter season. At the beginning of the New Year, I wanted to meet these brothers and sisters of ours, so harshly tried, in order to share their pain and their hopes. I thank everyone who helped me during this short Pastoral Visit: from the civil, administrative, military and religious authorities and volunteer workers, to everyone who was involved in facilitating all my movements and my meeting with the people. Above all, my cordial thanks to the earthquake victims for their warm welcome. I keep their faces in my heart and continue to entrust them to the Lord in my prayer.
2. During my pilgrimage I paused at the tomb of Francis of Assisi, patron of Italy. In the silence of the Lower Basilica, in one of the few places spared by the earthquake, I prayed for the victims and, through the intercession of Sts Francis and Clare, I presented everyone’s hopes and concerns to God. St Francis is universally known as a man of peace, and the land of his birth is a significant call to brotherhood, reconciliation and peace. Let us ask the “Poverello of Assisi” to support the commitment of everyone who is working for solidarity and peace.
Authentic peace, as I wrote in my Message for the World Day of Peace this year, is closely connected with the justice of each individual. It requires lawfulness and demands respect for every person’s rights. In this regard I would like to recall, as I customarily do on the first Sunday of every new year, the injustice of kidnapping. I pray again in solidarity for those kidnapped and for their relatives, and I appeal to the humanity of those who are guilty, that they release their victims and thus free themselves from the snares of evil by converting their hearts to love.
3. My concern grows deeper and more acute at the persistence of violence and killing in the world. On the night between Tuesday and Wednesday last, yet another unprecedented slaughter was perpetrated in Algeria with an enormous number of victims killed with brutal cruelty. Furthermore, on the first day of the year there was a furious armed conflict in Burundi which victimized numerous civilians and sowed death and panic, especially among defenceless and innocent people. Once again I express how deeply I deplore these bloody events, which must shock every conscience. The path of violence is not the way to a better future!
I entrust these victims and their families, together with all the innocent dead of these senseless fratricidal wars, to Mary, Mother of God and Queen of Peace, whom we have called upon at the dawn of this new year, and I beg those responsible to accept my pressing appeal to put an end to the systematic violence and to adopt peaceful solutions, with respect for the dignity and rights of every human being.
  © Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday 26 December 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. This Sunday we are celebrating the Feast of the Holy Family of Nazareth, and it is very significant that this year it takes place the day after Christmas and the opening of the Great Jubilee.
I would therefore like to extend my special good wishes to families: a merry Christmas and a happy Jubilee Year to you all, families of Rome and of the entire world! The Jubilee that marks the 2,000th anniversary of Christ's birth is yours in a particular way, because it recalls how God chose to enter human history through a family.
2. At the beginning of the Holy Year 2000, today's feast gives me a favourable opportunity to appeal anew for the rights of the family, of life and of children which are also recognized by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Indeed, in order to promote human rights, those of the family must be protected since it is from families that a full response can be made to the challenges of the present and the future.
The family is a community of love and life, which is created when a man and a woman give themselves to one another without reserve in marriage, open to the gift of children. The fundamental right to life is inherent in the human being from the moment of conception and is the essence of natural law and of the traditions of the great religions, as well as of the spirit of Article Three of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
The union between the mother and the child conceived and the irreplaceable role of the father require that the child be welcomed into a family which, as far as possible, will guarantee the presence of both parents. The specific contribution made by each one to the family and through it, to society, deserves the highest esteem.
3. Today families need the special protection of the public authorities which are often subjected to pressure groups concerned to have passed as law what is actually the fruit of a selfish and subjectivist mentality.
"The future of humanity passes by way of the family" (Apostolic Exhortation, Familiaris consortio, n. 86); and the great family of nations is built from this small but fundamental cell. May God enlighten legislators, leaders, and every person of good will, in order to promote the effective protection of the rights of the family, of life and of children.
May we be helped in this by the Holy Family of Nazareth, who welcomed and helped to raise the Redeemer of the world.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father prayed for all those in the world who are suffering, and thanked the volunteer workers for the Jubilee:
In these days when the Christmas atmosphere invites people to improve themselves and become more fraternal, we must pray for the peoples living in great suffering.
In particular we feel close to the inhabitants of Chechnya, just as we cannot forget the many peoples of Africa, among whom I would like to mention the citizens of Côte d'Ivoire who are going through a difficult period in their history.
To all who strive to take the way of harmony and peace I say: have the courage of a loyal and persevering dialogue, so that brotherhood, which Jesus, made man, came to offer as a gift to all humanity, can at last become a reality for everyone.
I also greet the first group of Jubilee volunteer workers who have most generously offered their services to help pilgrims. Dear friends, your valuable work and the work of those who will follow your example will, I am certain, help to show the welcoming face of the Church.
Happy holidays and happy Jubilee Year.
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 19 December 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. This Sunday takes us into the last week of Advent: next Saturday will be Christmas and before the solemn Midnight Mass the Holy Door will be opened, leading us into the Great Jubilee of the 2000th anniversary of Christ's birth.
The lights decorating the streets recall one aspect of this feast, a more superficial one which, although not in itself negative, nonetheless risks distracting us from the true spirit of Christmas. If Christmas has rightly become the feast of gifts, it is because it celebrates the gift par excellence which God gave to humanity in the person of Jesus. This tradition, however, must be observed in harmony with the meaning of the event, in simplicity and moderation.
The Church this year invites us in a particular way to prepare for this solemnity with joyful spiritual commitment: with prayer, with a thorough examination of conscience that will lead to the sacrament of Reconciliation, and with acts of charity to our neighbour, especially to our brethren in need.
2. This Sunday's Gospel presents the Virgin Mary in the act of receiving the announcement of the Messiah's birth. For every Christian and for every person of good will, her attitude is an example of how to prepare for Christmas and for the Great Jubilee. It is an attitude of faith, which consists in listening to the Word of God in order to assent to it with complete readiness of mind and heart.
The Mother of Christ teaches us to recognize the time of God, the favourable moment when he comes into our life and asks for a prompt and generous response. The mystery of the Holy Night, which occurred historically 2,000 years ago, becomes a reality as a spiritual event in the "today" of the liturgy. The Word, who took up his dwelling in Mary's womb, comes knocking at the door of every person's heart with particular intensity at this coming Christmas.
3. In opening the Holy Door, the Church symbolically says that God has opened the way of salvation to all. It is up to each person to respond, like Mary with a personal and sincere "yes", making room in his own life for God's love.
At Christmas, "the true light that enlightens every man is coming into the world" (Jn 1: 9), and the goal of the Holy Year 2000 is to bring this light to every person and every situation. May the example and intercession of Blessed Mary help us to welcome the Saviour, in order to receive the authentic gift of his Birth in all its fullness.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father expressed his encouragement for the "Derby of the Heart", an Italian programme to aid the disadvantaged, and called on all people of good will to support relief efforts in Venezuela, which has been plagued by extensive flooding.
I extend a cordial thought to the organizers, to the artists and all who will be taking part next Tuesday, at Rome's Olympic Stadium, in the 10th Derby of the Heart. The aim of this praiseworthy initiative, which belongs to the spirit of the now imminent Jubilee, is to raise funds for associations that provide care for the weakest and most defenceless. May this Derby always be inspired with genuine solidarity! I extend my best wishes to all who will be taking part in this event and to those who will follow it on radio or television and support the beneficial purposes of this special Derby.
I am following with sadness the news from Venezuela, where an ever growing number of people have died, disappeared or been displaced by the torrential rains that have also caused enormous material damage. Once again I express my closeness to the beloved Venezuelan people and urge all institutions and people of good will to contribute generously to relieving their great suffering and to helping repair the tragic consequences of this tremendous natural disaster. May Our Lady of Coromoto intercede for these people who honour her as mother and patroness.
  © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II 
ANGELUS
Sunday 12 December 1999
   Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. Today the liturgy invites us to rejoice because "the Lord is at hand" (Phil 4: 5). The day of his Birth is now close, as is the Great Jubilee, which in a sense will be a year-long celebration of the mystery of the Incarnation, 2,000 years after the coming of the Son of God in the lowliness of our human nature.
It is Christ himself, using Isaiah's prophetic words, who explains the reasons for this joy: "The Spirit of the Lord", he proclaims, "is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach good news to the poor" (Lk 4: 18; cf. Is 61: 1).
On the eve of the new millennium, the Church makes this message of hope her own and proclaims "the year of the Lord's favour" (Is 61: 2), inviting all to draw abundantly from the very source of grace, Jesus Christ, the Man-God, Redeemer of man and the centre of history.
2. One of the popular expressions of the joyful expectation of Christmas is the preparation of cribs in families. In Christian homes these are the days when a suitable corner is chosen for arranging the figurines, leaving room between Mary and Joseph for the Child Jesus. Having in mind all the Christian families arranging their cribs, I very gladly bless you, dear boys and girls of Rome, who have come in large numbers with your Bambinelli. May Christmas, now close at hand, spur you and all believers in every part of the world to prepare a worthy dwelling-place for Christ.
Precisely in order to have more accommodating places of worship today in every neighbourhood in the Diocese of Rome, we are observing the day of prayer and collections for the construction of new churches in the outlying areas of the city. As I thank everyone who has contributed to this project in recent years, I hope that a church with other parish facilities can be built in the areas where one is lacking, as a true reference-point for the spiritual and community life of so many people and families.
3. May Mary, the one who cherishes the secret of joy, accompany us on this journey to the Holy Night. Her immaculate heart is filled with the joyful expectation of God's coming and the fulfilment of his promises.
In cribs it is the image of the Blessed Virgin which attracts our special attention. In her we see the mothers who are preparing to give birth. In her we recognize all the women who surround the great mystery of life with love and care. May the Mother of the Lord help us to be ready for Christmas by preparing our hearts to receive Jesus.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
This evening a demonstration will be held at the Colosseum as part of the world campaign for a moratorium on the death penalty. The Great Jubilee is an excellent opportunity to promote in the world ever more mature forms of respect for the life and dignity of every person. I therefore renew my appeal to all leaders to reach an international consensus on the abolition of the death penalty, since "cases in which the execution of the offender is an absolute necessity are very rare, if not practically non-existent" (Catechism of the Catholic Church, n. 2267).
Next Tuesday, 14 December, I will have the joy of celebrating Holy Mass for university students. I expect the whole university world of Rome to come to the Vatican Basilica for this gathering of faith shortly before Christmas.
I would like to extend a cordial greeting to the representatives of the RAI (Italian Radio and Television) and La Sapienza University, who, with the approach of the Christmas holidays, are involved in organizing a convention on child hunger, scheduled for next Wednesday in Rome. I hope that this praiseworthy project, promoted in collaboration with the FAO, the World Food Programme and the United Nations, will help to inform and to increase public awareness of the serious problem of hunger that afflicts a large part of humanity, especially the world of children.
I affectionately greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims, especially those who have come from San Pedro del Pinatar, Lorca and Alhama in Murcia. As Christmas draws near, I invite you to open your hearts to Jesus, the Incarnate Word, proclaiming him in word and by the witness of your life. Many thanks.
I greet the Italian-speaking pilgrims, particularly the faithful from the parishes of St Pius X in Bolzano and Our Lady of Mt Carmel in Trieste, as well as the group from the ACLI Tourist Centre of Chiavari, and the Confirmation candidates with their parents and the Salesian Sisters who teach catechism at Sts Rufina and Secunda Parish in Rome.
Happy Christmas to all! Praised be Jesus Christ!
   © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II 
ANGELUS
Wednesday 8 December 1999
Solemnity of the Immaculate Conception
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. Today we are celebrating the Solemnity of the Immaulate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary, a feast particularly dear to the Christian people. In the Mother of Jesus, the first-fruits of redeemed humanity, God works great things, filling her with grace and preserving her from any stain of sin.
At Nazareth Mary was called "full of grace" by the Angel. These words express her unique destiny, but also, in a more general sense, that of every person. The "fullness of grace", which is Mary's starting-point, for all others is the goal: for, as the Apostle Paul says, God created us to "be holy and blameless before him" (Eph 1: 4). This is why he "blessed us" before our earthly existence and sent his Son into the world to redeem us from sin. Mary is the masterpiece of this saving work, the one who was created "All fair", "All holy".
2. The Immaculate Virgin reminds every human being, whatever his situation, that God loves him personally, that he desires only his good and follows him constantly with a plan of grace and mercy, which culminated in Christ's redemptive sacrifice.
What happened to Mary turns our attention to Jesus Christ, the only Mediator of salvation, and helps us to see life as a loving plan with which we must cooperate responsibly. Mary is not only a model of the call, but also of the response. Indeed, she said "yes" to God at the beginning and at every successive moment of her life, fully complying with his will, even when she found it obscure and hard to accept.
3. This year, as the Great Jubilee is about to begin, the feast of the Immaculate Conception acquires particular meaning. May Mary illumine the steps of our pilgrimage to the Holy Door and show everyone the "door" which is Christ, through which she was the first to pass, inviting all to enter through it so as to be "holy and blameless in love".
What we contemplate and celebrate in Mary today, that is, her being "full of grace" and free from sin, is the mature fruit of the Jubilee. Thus the image of Mary Immaculate, who is traditionally depicted in the act of crushing the head of the serpent, Satan, appears more eloquent than ever in this season of Advent, which in a sense is the "entrance way" to the Great Jubilee.
Dear friends, let us turn our gaze to Mary, the sign of sure hope! May the Immaculate Virgin help each of us to be converted to Jesus, to experience the healing power of his love. This is my hope for all believers today, as I invite them to enter the now imminent Holy Year with commitment.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father said: 
I extend a cordial greeting to all the pilgrims, especially the members of the Pontifical Academy of the Immaculate, led by Cardinal Andrzej Deskur. Dear friends, may Our Lady make the light of Christ the Lord always shine in your lives.
A Telethon will be held in Italy over the next few days to combat muscular dystrophy and other genetic diseases. It is a work of solidarity, which I hope will enjoy great success. I promise a remembrance in prayer to the individuals and families who suffer from these diseases.
I wish everyone a tranquil feast of the Immaculate Conception, as I make an appointment with Romans for this afternoon in Piazza di Spagna.
     © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 5 December 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. On this Second Sunday of Advent, the Gospel resounds with the voice of John the Baptist, the prophet sent by God as the forerunner of the Messiah. He appears in the wilderness of Judea and, re-echoing an ancient prophecy of Isaiah, cries out: "Prepare the way of the Lord, make straight his paths". This message has come to us down the centuries and is remarkably current.
First of all, "prepare the way of the Lord!". Preparing the way of the Lord this year means being ready to pass through the Holy Door, i.e., to receive the superabundant grace that Christ brought to the world and which the Jubilee Year will make available to all.
In the last three years we have made an intense journey "through Christ - in the Spirit - to the Father". Now the four weeks of Advent represent, so to speak, the "entrance way" to the Great Jubilee. Let us prepare our spirit with prayer, so that this Christmas will find us ready to meet the Saviour who comes!
2. "Make straight his paths". In order to meet our Redeemer, we must "repent", that is, approach him with joyful faith, leaving behind those ways of thinking and living which prevent us from following him completely.
When we hear the Good News of a God who emptied himself for love of us and took on our human condition, we cannot help opening our hearts to repentance; we cannot shut ourselves up in pride and hypocrisy, making it impossible to find true peace. The image of the Holy Door, which we now see close at hand, reminds us that God abounds in tender and merciful love. Like the father in the parable, he is ready to embrace with open arms the children who have the courage to return to him (cf. Lk 15: 20).
This commitment to conversion is based on the certainty that God's fidelity never fails, despite everything negative that we find in and around us. This is why Advent is theseason of expectation and hope. This Sunday the Church makes her own the consoling promise of Isaiah: "All mankind shall see the salvation of God" (Gospel acclamation; cf. Is 40: 5).
3. Dear brothers and sisters, in three days we will contemplate in the Immaculate Conception the first and most complete fulfilment of this promise. Mary, "full of grace", is the realization of all that God wants to accomplish in every person. The Mother of the Redeemer was preserved from sin and filled with divine grace. Her spiritual beauty invites us to have confidence and hope; the Blessed Virgin, all fair and all holy, encourages us to prepare the ways of the Lord and make straight his paths, in order one day to contemplate with her the salvation of God.
After reciting the Angelus and giving his Blessing, the Holy Father greeted various pilgrim groups from Poland, Spain and Italy.
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday 28 November 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. With the First Sunday of Advent today we begin the new liturgical year and, more specifically, the period of preparation for the Lord's Birth. The whole Church, a pilgrim in this world, sets out on her spiritual journey towards the awaited Messiah.
God is the "One who comes": he came among us in the person of Jesus Christ; he comes again in the Church's sacraments and in every human being who asks our help; he will come in glory at the end of time. This is why Advent is marked by watchful and active expectation, nourished by love and hope, which expands into praise and supplication and is expressed in concrete works of fraternal charity.
2. Today begins an extraordinary Advent: it is the Advent of the Great Jubilee, in which we will celebrate the 2,000th anniversary of the Saviour's coming in the lowliness of our human nature. "Contemplating the mystery of the Incarnation of the Son of God, the Church prepares to cross the threshold of the third millennium" (Bull Incarnationis mysterium, n. 1). This is a contemplation of faith, free of any millenarian temptation. It has guided the steps of the People of God in recent decades, in the spiritual atmosphere of a great, unique "advent", as I recalled at the very beginning of my Pontificate (cf. Redemptor hominis, n. 1).
Preparing for the Lord's Birth this year means preparing to enter through the Holy Door, the symbol of the passage to new and eternal life, which Jesus Christ came to open to every human being.
This accentuates the penitential dimension, already present in the Advent season and vividly recalled by the person of John the Baptist, who teaches, precisely, that the way of the Lord is prepared by changing of one's mentality and life (cf. Mt 3: 1-3).
3. Advent is the Marian season par excellence, because Mary is the woman who awaited and welcomed the Son of God made man in an exemplary way. May the Virgin Mary help us to open the doors of our hearts to Christ, Redeemer of man and of history; may she teach us to be humble, because God looks upon the lowly; may she enable us to grow in understanding the value of prayer, of inner silence, of listening to God's Word; may she spur us to seek God's will deeply and sincerely, even when this upsets our plans; may she encourage us while we wait for the Lord, sharing our time and energies with those in need.
Mother of God, Virgin of expectation, grant that the God-who-comes will find us ready to receive the abundance of his mercy.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted groups of Spanish, Ukrainian, Slovenian and Italian pilgrims.
The Holy Father invited the faithful to pray for their Catholic brothers and sisters who were victims of the recent bombing at Our Lady of Madhu Shrine in Sri Lanka. 
I now ask you to pray for our Catholic brothers and sisters in Sri Lanka, where Our Lady of Madhu Shrine was violently bombed, claiming the lives of numerous civilians who had sought refuge there.
I am spiritually close to the Bishops, priests and faithful who are mourning the deceased, helping the injured and are greatly distressed at seeing a shrine, revered not only by Catholics, profaned and turned into a place of death.
I entrust all the beloved people of Sri Lanka to the Blessed Virgin and I pray that God will give the parties in conflict the grace of having the courage to embark decisively on the way of peace, which certainly cannot be found with weapons in one's hand!
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday 21 November 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The Solemnity of Christ the King of the Universe, which ends the liturgical year, has been gladdened this morning by the canonization of 12 new saints: 10 religious, one born in Argentina, who were martyred in Spain in the 1930s; St Benedict Menni, a priest of the Hospitallers of St John of God, of Italian origin but who also worked in Spain where he founded the Hospitaller Sisters of the Sacred Heart of Jesus; and St Thomas of Cori, a priest of the Order of Friars Minor.
As I cordially greet the pilgrims who have come for this joyful event, I invite everyone to praise the Lord for the great work he has accomplished in these Gospel witnesses. I urge them in particular to contemplate the fervent devotion they had to the Mother of the Redeemer, on the day when we recall her presentation in the temple.
2. The presentation of the Blessed Virgin Mary is one of the most beloved feasts of the Eastern tradition, which has also been celebrated in the West since the 14th century. Mary appears to us today as the temple in which God has placed his salvation and as the handmaid who was totally consecrated to the Lord. Each year on this day the Ecclesial Community throughout the world remembers cloistered nuns, who have embraced a totally contemplative life and live on what Providence provides for them through the generosity of the faithful. As I remind everyone of their duty not to let these consecrated sisters want for spiritual and material support, I extend my warm greeting and thanks to them.
I invite them, in particular, to love the cloister, seeing in it - as was said in the recent Instruction of the Congregation for Institutes of Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life - "an ascetical means of immense value ... especially well suited to life wholly directed to contemplation" (n. 5). Indeed, it is "the sign, the safeguard and the form of the wholly contemplative life, lived as a total gift of self" (n. 10).
3. Today is Migration Day in Italy. Migration is an important phenomenon which offers us many opportunities to do good as well as numerous challenges. I encourage those who work in this field to make the most of the human and spiritual potential of migration, as the theme suggested for this event clearly stresses: "On different roads to the one Father".
As we recite the Angelus, let us entrust to Blessed Mary, Queen of All Saints and Mother of Hope, the various prayer intentions which this Sunday offers us.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus and giving his Blessing, the Holy Father greeted the many Spanish, Argentinian and Italian pilgrims in the square.
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 14 november 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today in Italy we are celebrating Thanksgiving Day, which invites us to thank God for all the fruits of the earth.
At the end of one farming season and the beginning of another, we implore divine blessings on the countryside and the rural world, that the Lord will support all who work in the fields.
While I express deep gratitude to those who are fervently dedicated to farming, which is indispensable for the survival of all humanity, I invite the authorities and public opinion to consider the needs and expectations of rural populations with committed solidarity. May this day, which has been observed in Italy for almost 50 years, foster renewed attention to them. May this event be an occasion for greater appreciation of creation, which God entrusted to human beings to be cultivated and preserved as a precious gift.
2. I am grateful to the Lord not only for the fruits of this earth but also for my pilgrimage to India and Georgia, which I will have the opportunity to speak of next Wednesday at the General Audience. This great spiritual experience marks a further stage on the path of the new evangelization towards the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000.
I also thank God for the ecumenical celebration which took place yesterday in the Vatican Basilica in memory of St Bridget.
During this sacred rite, Christ's prayer in the Upper Room constantly echoed in my heart: "Ut unum sint". May we continue to take the path Christ has shown us, in the hope of achieving the full unity of all believers as soon as possible. May Mary, Mother of the Church, support us in this effort.
3. I cannot fail to mention some disasters and catastrophes that have occurred in recent days: in Foggia an apartment building collapsed, crushing many families in the rubble; in Kosovo aWorld Food Programme plane crashed with admirable volunteers aboard; in Turkey there has been another violent earthquake following the one in August; two weeks ago an EgyptAir plane plunged into the Atlantic Ocean.
I ask you to pray for the many victims and I express my closeness and solidarity to all who are suffering because of these enormous tragedies.
At the same time, I encourage the rescue, aid and solidarity efforts which have been undertaken so quickly and generously, and which deserve deep appreciation.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims and visitors and mentioned the Day for the Victims of Road Accidents: 
I greet the parish groups from Los Angeles, San Bernardino and Brooklyn. Upon all the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors present for this Marian prayer I cordially invoke the intercession of Our Lady, Queen of Peace. God bless you all!
Today many countries are observing the Day for the Victims of Road Accidents. On this occasion I promise to pray especially for all who have lost their lives on the road. I also take the opportunity to stress the importance of thorough and effective driving instruction, as well as to remind everyone of the duty to drive always with caution and a sense of responsibililty.
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
New Delhi - 7 November 1999
At the end of this Eucharistic celebration, we turn with confidence to Mary, Mother of God. Two thousand years ago the Blessed Virgin gave birth to the incarnate Word on Asian soil. Today, Mary continues to cooperate in the birth and growth of divine life in the souls of the baptized. In their daily lives, may the Church’s sons and daughters follow the example of Mary, imitating her ability to discern God’s will in every circumstance; her total self-offering in love; her boundless fidelity and tireless devotion; her strength, capable of bearing the greatest sorrows; her capacity always to speak words of support and encouragement.
To you, Mother of the Church, we entrust the results of the Special Assembly for Asia of the Synod of Bishops: lead the Church in Asia in the joyful proclamation of faith in Jesus Christ our Saviour, and in generous service to the peoples of this continent.
To you, Model of Holiness, we entrust the clergy, the consecrated men and women, and the laity of the Church in Asia: renew and sustain them in a spirit of zeal and in their commitment to the great task of evangelization and service.
To you, Mirror of Justice, we entrust those responsible for the destiny of this continent: may they seek tirelessly the common good, and work for the true spiritual and material development of the peoples of this continent.
To you, Mother of Mercy, we entrust the poor, the needy and the suffering: teach us to be one in spirit with them, in order to serve them as our brothers and sisters.
To you, Mother of the Redeemer, we entrust the young people of Asia: to them the Church offers the truth of the Gospel as a joyful and liberating message, and asks them to use their freshness and enthusiasm, their spirit of solidarity and hope as peacemakers in a divided world.
Mary, Mother of the New Creation, pray for us, your children, now and always!
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
New Delhi - 7 November 1999
  At the end of this Eucharistic celebration, we turn with confidence to Mary, Mother of God. Two thousand years ago the Blessed Virgin gave birth to the incarnate Word on Asian soil. Today, Mary continues to cooperate in the birth and growth of divine life in the souls of the baptized. In their daily lives, may the Church’s sons and daughters follow the example of Mary, imitating her ability to discern God’s will in every circumstance; her total self-offering in love; her boundless fidelity and tireless devotion; her strength, capable of bearing the greatest sorrows; her capacity always to speak words of support and encouragement.
To you, Mother of the Church, we entrust the results of the Special Assembly for Asia of the Synod of Bishops: lead the Church in Asia in the joyful proclamation of faith in Jesus Christ our Saviour, and in generous service to the peoples of this continent.
To you, Model of Holiness, we entrust the clergy, the consecrated men and women, and the laity of the Church in Asia: renew and sustain them in a spirit of zeal and in their commitment to the great task of evangelization and service.
To you, Mirror of Justice, we entrust those responsible for the destiny of this continent: may they seek tirelessly the common good, and work for the true spiritual and material development of the peoples of this continent.
To you, Mother of Mercy, we entrust the poor, the needy and the suffering: teach us to be one in spirit with them, in order to serve them as our brothers and sisters.
To you, Mother of the Redeemer, we entrust the young people of Asia: to them the Church offers the truth of the Gospel as a joyful and liberating message, and asks them to use their freshness and enthusiasm, their spirit of solidarity and hope as peacemakers in a divided world.
Mary, Mother of the New Creation, pray for us, your children, now and always!
     © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II 
ANGELUS
Monday, 1 november 1999
Solemnity of All Saints
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. Today we are celebrating the Solemnity of All Saints. On this festive occasion the pilgrim Church on earth lifts her gaze to heaven, to the immense throng of men and women to whom God has given a share in his holiness. As the Book of Revelation teaches, they come "from every nation, from all tribes and peoples and tongues" (Rv 7: 9). During their earthly life they were committed to always doing his will, to loving him with all their heart and their neighbour as themselves. For this reason they also suffered trials and persecutions, and now enjoy their great and eternal reward in heaven (cf. Mt 5: 11).
Dear friends, this is our future! This is the most genuine and universal vocation of all humanity: to form the great family of God's children by striving to anticipate its essential traits here on earth. We are drawn to this goal by the shining example of our many brothers and sisters whom, down the centuries, the Church has recognized as blesseds and saints, offering them as examples and guides to everyone. Today we call upon their common intercession, that every person will open himself to God's love, the source of life and holiness.
2. Tomorrow this supplication will become an intense, unanimous prayer to the Father of mercy for all the faithful departed. In every part of the world the Eucharistic sacrifice will be offered in suffrage for them; it is the pledge of eternal life for the living and the dead, as Christ himself said: ; "I am the bread of life.... He who eats this bread will live for ever" (Jn. 6: 48, 58).
On these days, those who can will visit cemeteries to pray at the graves of their loved ones. Today I too will go down to the Vatican Grottoes to pray at the tombs of my Predecessors. I will also go in spirit to the cemetery in Kraków, where my own deceased loved ones are buried, and to the other cemeteries of the world in order to pray especially at the forgotten graves.
The liturgy, in fact, teaches us to pray for everyone, in the name of that bond of solidarity that joins the Church's members to one another: it is a bond stronger than death itself. May no one lack the support of our prayer.
3. In this spiritual climate, we feel Holy Mary's living, consoling presence closer to us than ever. Today we call upon her as the Queen of All Saints, as we contemplate her at the centre of the heavenly assembly of the blessed spirits. Tomorrow we will entrust the souls of the faithful departed to her, the Mother of Mercy.
For the People of God she is a sign of consolation and sure hope. We see in her the living icon of Christ's words: "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God" (Mt 5: 8). Through her intercession may we make our own this Gospel beatitude.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father appealed for peace in Chechnya.
On today's solemnity I would also like to ask you to implore from the Lord, through the intercession of all the saints, the precious gift of peace for Chechnya, a land very dear to us.
May our heartfelt prayer obtain the grace of harmony for those sorely-tried communities, as we express the hope that the tensions there will be peacefully resolved with respect for the rights of all citizens.
© Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II 
ANGELUS
Sunday, 31 october 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. In Augsburg, Germany, a very important event is taking place at this moment. Representatives of the Catholic Church and the Lutheran World Federation are signing a Joint Declaration on one of the principal points which have divided Catholics and Lutherans: the doctrine of justification by faith.
This is a milestone on the difficult path to re-establishing full unity among Christians, and it is highly significant that it is taking place in the exact city where in 1530 a decisive page in the Lutheran reform was written with the Augsburg Confession.
This document represents a sound basis for continuing the ecumenical theological research and for addressing the remaining problems with a better founded hope of resolving them in the future. It is also a valuable contribution to the purification of historical memory and to our common witness.
2. I would like to thank the Lord for this intermediate goal on our journey, one that is difficult but rich in joy, unity and communion among Christians. It offers, in fact, a significant response to the will of Christ, who before his passion prayed to the Father that his disciples would be one (cf. Jn 17: 11). Another reason for gratitude is the fact that this encouraging sign is occurring on the threshold of the Year 2000, so that Christians can celebrate the Great Jubilee, "if not completely united, at least much closer to overcoming the divisions of the second millennium" (Tertio millennio adveniente, n. 34).
I offer my thanks to all who prayed and worked to make this Joint Declaration possible. At the same time I would like to stress that Fraternal Delegates from other Churches and Ecclesial Communions took part in the Special Assembly for Europe of the Synod of Bishops, which just concluded. This Assembly included the ecumenical journey among the signs of hope for a continent which gave rise to a majority of the divisions between Christians and still suffers much from their consequences.
3. I invite everyone to renew his prayerful and vigorous trust in the Holy Spirit, "who can banish from us the painful memories of our separation. The Spirit is able to grant us clear-sightedness, strength and courage to take whatever steps are necessary, that our commitment may be ever more authentic" (Ut unum sint, n. 102).
Christians know what the angel said to Mary on the day of the Annunciation: "With God nothing is impossible" (Lk 1: 37). Their hope in full unity is based on God's might.
Let us entrust the ecumenical journey to the maternal intercession of the Blessed Virgin, the greatest example of the justice that comes from faith. May she, who brought the Incarnate Word to the world 2,000 years ago, lead all believers to him, "the true light that enlightens every man" (Jn 1: 9).
After imparting his blessing, the Pope spoke about National Cancer Research Day in Italy.

National Cancer Research Day will be held next Sunday, 7 November. In expressing my appreciation of the activity of the Italian Cancer Research Association, which is promoting this praiseworthy initiative, I would like to encourage scientists, as well as those who support cancer research and those who care each day for people afflicted by this disease, to continue their generous work. I also urge civil society and the Christian community to support every effort to eradicate cancer, in order to give hope to the sick and to their families.
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 24 october 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The Second Special Assembly for Europe of the Synod of Bishops ended yesterday with a solemn Eucharistic celebration in the Vatican Basilica. From the Synodal work came frequent appeals to believers to be courageous Gospel missionaries on our continent.
Europe is thirsting for hope; for this very reason it needs Christ. Indeed, as the theme of the Synod Assembly recalls, it is he who is the source of hope for every person.
2. Today the invitation to be missionaries takes on a universal dimension:  in fact, today we are celebrating the last World Mission Day of the millennium. Confronted by the spiritual needs of our time, all Christians are called to commit themselves effectively for God's kingdom with that zeal which, since childhood, motivated Pauline Jaricot who began the Society for the Propagation of the Faith. This year is the bicentenary of her birth. May her luminous example encourage the Church to spread throughout the world the message of Christ's kingdom with ever greater commitment.
In this perspective, the celebration on 22 October 2000 of a special Mission Jubilee and of the World Mission Congress organized by the Congregation for the Evangelization of Peoples will be of great interest. It will be a providential occasion to thank God for all that has been done so far and to renew the zeal and enthusiasm of the entire Christian people for the work of the new evangelization.
3. Today, with the whole Church, I extend my warm greeting and my thanks to the missionaries ad gentes, who carry out the work entrusted to them undaunted by difficulties, and sometimes even at the cost of their lives. May they never lack our spiritual and material support.
Let us pray, dear brothers and sisters, for these generous people who are dedicated to serving the Gospel.
May Mary most holy, Star of Evangelization, accompany missionaries and make fruitful the effort of everyone who cooperates in every way in the Church's universal mission.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted in their own languages the French-, German- and Italian-speaking pilgrims and visitors. He then invited everyone to pray for peace in Colombia.
Today a peace march is being held in all the cities of Colombia. The Colombians in Rome are united with this initiative, and have come here this morning as a sign of solidarity and to participate in our common prayer.
I invite everyone to join their invocation to obtain the gift of peace from God, as I bless and encourage the efforts that are already being made to this effect.
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II  
ANGELUS
Sunday, 17 october 1999
Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Next Sunday we will celebrate World Mission Day whose theme is "The Father: Source of Apostolic Commitment in the Church".
The mission of Christ who, appearing to the Apostles on Easter Day in the evening, passed on to them his own mission: "As the Father has sent me, even so I send you" (Jn 20: 21) originates in God's heart, a source of infinite love. As the Father sent the Son, so the Son sends the Church to the very ends of the earth. This is a unique mission, a unique message of salvation which comes from God and is destined for every human being so that, redeemed from sin, all may become children of God.
2. The Church never ceases to proclaim God's fatherhood to the world with the preaching and witness of his children. Evangelization, in fact, is strengthened and made credible by the holiness of Christians and ecclesial communities who strive to live as true children of God, putting into practice the twofold commandment of love.
I am thinking of the many missionaries, priests, religious and lay people who witness to Christ in every corner of the earth, surrounded by difficulties, who sometimes pay with their blood for their fidelity to the mission. May these brothers and sisters of ours never lack the spiritual and material support of our communities.
3. World Mission Day invites all believers to be missionaries in their own walk of life. Indeed, the Church has many tasks, but only one mission. This is the spirit in which I too try to carry out the apostolic ministry which divine Providence entrusted to me on 16 October 1978. While I cordially thank all those who have renewed their fervent good wishes to me on this occasion and have assured me of their remembrance before the Lord, I ask everyone to continue to accompany me with prayer, so that I can faithfully continue this service to the Church of Rome and the entire Christian people.
I renew the total entrustment of my person, of my mission and of the entire Church to Mary, her tender and provident mother.
With these sentiments we now turn to her with the recitation of the Angelus.
Today we are celebrating World Day for the Eradication of Poverty, founded by Fr Wresinski and recognized by the United Nations. In this last preparatory year for the Great Jubilee which is dedicated to God the merciful Father and to charity, I express my spiritual closeness to all who live in conditions of extreme poverty.
God hears the cry of the poor. You who suffer and hope, Christ is with you for he fights beside those whose dignity is held up to ridicule. The Church is with you in your daily struggle to build your families and raise your children.
I also appeal to the leaders of nations, to all Christ's disciples and to people of good will to be more and more committed to finding a remedy for extreme poverty by supporting the efforts of those who are fighting the poverty in which they live and of those who support them, and to working enthusiastically to create a culture of solidarity and a society where each one has his place, with respect for the principles of justice, peace, brotherhood and charity.
To the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors the Holy Father said:
I welcome all the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors present for this Marian prayer. I extend a special greeting to the members of the Anti-Defamation League from Denver, Colorado. God bless you all!

Today, in the Diocese of Rome, a special day of prayer is being celebrated to promote awareness in preparation for World Youth Day which will take place from 15 to 20 August in the year 2000. I invite Romans to prepare a warm welcome - also in their own homes - for all the young people who will be gathering in our city from all over the world. I ask young people to continue with enthusiasm on their way to this great ecclesial event which will be their Jubilee par excellence.
Let us entrust the successful outcome of this important appointment to Mary, Salus populi romani.
I affectionately welcome the Young Albanians, Ambassadors of Peace, with their missionaries and teachers, and I am pleased to bless the "peace bell" made with shells collected in the Albanian region of Zadrima, which will be hung in the central square of Tirana on the first day of 2000.
I also greet the members of the Young Mountaineers' Association who, in the spirit of Bl. Pier Giorgio Frassati, have followed an ancient "pilgrims' route" on foot through the Alps to Rome.
I cordially greet all the other pilgrims present, and wish each one a pleasant Sunday.
   © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
  ANGELUS
Sunday, 10 october 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. The liturgical memorial of Our Lady of the Rosary, which we celebrated last Thursday, gives me another opportunity to speak of the value of this exceptional form of Marian prayer which is the Holy Rosary.
Following the example of my venerable Predecessors, I have not failed to stress its importance on various occasions. It wonderfully combines simplicity and depth, the individual and community dimensions. The Rosary itself is a contemplative prayer and is also a powerful form of intercession: indeed, whoever recites it is united with Mary in meditating on the mysteries of Christ and is led to ask her for the grace of these same mysteries in the various situations of life and history.
2. During the month of October, the month of the Rosary, let us have frequent recourse to this Marian prayer, which was once a daily prayer of Christian families. There are many intentions to entrust to Our Lady. In particular, I urge you to recite the Rosary for the Synod Assembly of the Bishops of Europe which is being held here in the Vatican. I am trying to participate in it diligently, and I can see the Synod Fathers' pastoral concern in facing the great challenges of the European continent. There is a strong emphasis on the need for a renewed and courageous evangelization, for extensive missionary work that will take into account the changed situations of a Europe that is increasingly multiethnic and multicultural.
In the past, praying the Rosary has helped to safeguard the integrity of faith of God's People; may fervent devotion to this prayer sustain the Church as she enters the third millennium, so that she will continue to be a prophetic "sign and instrument ... of communion with God and of the unity of the whole human race" (Lumen gentium, n. 1).
3. For this intention and for all the needs of the Church and the world, I invite everyone, especially children, families and the elderly, to call upon Mary with one voice during the entire month of October. Let us ask the Blessed Virgin to help the Church to be ever more and ever better the bridge uniting man with God and men with one another. Let us pray that peaceful encounter and respectful dialogue will be encouraged between peoples, cultures and religions.
Mary, Virgin of the Holy Rosary, pray for us!
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father spoke of the World Day of Mental Health and the Italian Day of Social Communications, and greeted a group of pilgrims from India.
Today we are observing the World Day of Mental Health, promoted by the World Health Organization. In her multifaceted commitment to the sick, the Church is always attentive to those affected by psychological disturbances. I assure these brothers and sisters of ours and their families a special remembrance in my prayer, and I encourage everyone who works at any level in this challenging field of health care.
Today in Italy it is also the annual Day of Social Communications, whose theme is: "The mass media: a friendly companion for those in search of the Father". May this celebration call everyone's attention to the means of social communication so that, through each person's contribution, they may be ever more attentive to man's profound need to know the origin and goal of his earthly pilgrimage.
I affectionately greet all the pilgrims here and wish everyone a peaceful Sunday.
I extend a special welcome to the pilgrim group from the Diocese of Vasai in India. I ask you to remember my forthcoming visit to your country in your prayers.
Upon all the English-speaking visitors I invoke almighty God's abundant blessings.
  © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 3 october 1999
 1. At the end of this solemn celebration, I affectionately greet all of you, dear pilgrims who have come from various parts of Italy and Europe to pay homage to the new blesseds. In particular, I greet those of you who are pilgrims from the Bologna region, from the Diocese of Brescia, from Lazio and Abruzzi, and from Sardinia. I also extend my greetings to those participating in the first National Conference on Divine Mercy, being held these days in Rome.
Thank you for your presence and your prayers. Along with you I would now like to turn with devotion and fervent prayer to Mary, Queen of All Saints. At her school the six new blesseds learned to follow Christ, renewing each day their unconditional "yes" to God's loving plan.
To the heavenly Mother of the Church and to these faithful witnesses of Christ we wish to entrust in a particular way the work of the Second Special Assembly for Europe of the Synod of Bishops, which opened two days ago. Dear brothers and sisters, accompany the Synod Fathers with your prayers and especially with the recitation of the Holy Rosary, which the Church recommends in this month of October.
2. I greet the pilgrims who have come for the beatification of Fr Edward Poppe, especially his compatriots from Belgium. The new blessed had a great devotion to the Virgin Mary. I encourage them to take Fr Poppe as their guide in living the Christian life. I invite priests to rediscover his life and message, so that they can be God's instruments in calling young people to serve him in the priesthood or the consecrated life. Let us fervently pray that the Lord will send workers into his harvest! Let us entrust these intentions to Our Lady's intercession!
  © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 26 September, 1999
  Faith and reason have vital relationship
Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. Returning to our reflection on the Encyclical Fides et ratio, today I would like to consider the role that reason plays in the journey of faith. Reason is involved in it in various ways. It is already present as the assent of faith matures, since the latter, although based on the "authority of God who reveals" (First Vatican Council, Dei Filius, DS 3008), develops in a profoundly rational way by discerning the "signs" of God that he himself has offered in salvation history (cf. Encyclical Fides et ratio, n. 12). Obviously, it is not a question of "proofs" as understood in experimental science. The signs of God are found instead "within the context of interpersonal communication" (ibid., n. 13) and, according to the logic of the latter, not only appeal to reason, but also call for a deep existential involvement. On this condition, and accompanied by the interior support of grace, they become clear signals, "signposts of the Spirit" as it were, pointing to God's presence and prompting man to abandon himself to him with complete trust.
2. Reason's task then continues beyond this "foundational" level. Mature faith calls on the intellect, employing it - in St Anselm's expression - "to seek that which it loves" (ibid., n. 42). Thus faith becomes not only reasonable but "reasoning". Here is the task that theology is called to fulfil: to gather the data of Revelation and to reflect systematically on them, to delve into their various dimensions, to grasp the harmony between the diverse aspects of truth and, finally, to respond to the ever new challenges posed by culture and history. A vital relationship is thus established between intelligence and faith. It could be said, in fact, that "each contains the other" (ibid., n. 17): on the one hand, we must believe, if we want to perceive something of the mystery that transcends us - "credo ut intelligam"; on the other, we must understand - "intelligo ut credam" - if faith is to be reasonable and ever more mature.
3. Today in a special way we wish to entrust theologians to the Blessed Virgin; theirs is the very important task of research and teaching in accordance with the demands of an adult faith. May Mary, "Seat of Wisdom", help them to carry out their "ministry" with the intellectual and spiritual commitment that it requires, in absolute docility to the Holy Spirit.
After praying the Angelus and imparting his Blessing, the Holy Father addressed the pilgrims in various languages, with a special word for the faithful of Albano, to whom he said:
Today I am particularly happy at the presence of many faithful from the Diocese of Albano! With great affection I greet Bishop Dante Bernini and express to him my sincere appreciation and deep gratitude for his pastoral ministry. For almost 18 years he has led this particular Church, to which Castel Gandolfo also belongs and whose titular is dear Cardinal Angelo Sodano, my Secretary of State. I extend my greetings to Auxiliary Bishop Paolo Gillet, to the priests here, to the consecrated persons and to all the lay faithful. Seeing you gathered here, I think of your journey in recent years, especially the Diocesan Synod, which is bearing fruit. I am also delighted with your generous willingness to welcome pilgrims during the now imminent Great Jubilee. I invoke every blessing, dear friends, upon all of you, your parish communities and your families, especially the children and the elderly. And I ask you to pray for me as I prepare to leave Castel Gandolfo to return to the Vatican.
Thank you again for your visit!
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 19 September 1999
   
1. At the end of this solemn Eucharistic celebration, let us offer our prayer to Mary, to whom Anton Martin Slomsek was always very devoted. He turned to her many times during his life. He never ceased to trust in her motherly protection.
Dear Slovenian brothers and sisters! The Blessed Virgin holds an important place in the religious devotion of your people. Many of your hymns speak of her and many lovely churches and chapels are dedicated to her in every corner of your land. Here I would particularly like to mention the three famous Marian Shrines of Sveta Gora, Brezje and Ptujska Gora, where you love to go on pilgrimage to seek refuge in your trials and hardships and to give thanks when your prayers have been heard.
In these centres of deep Marian spirituality, people learn to grow in faith and in the desire to imitate Our Lady in purity and in humble submission to God's will. Mary leads us to Christ, in whom the human family is called to become the family of God's children.
2. In this regard, it is sometimes thought that the human person is a totally autonomous and independent being with no relationship with God, as if he were sufficient unto himself and could draw the necessary energies for his fulfilment from his own reason and the work of his hands. But can the human person truly fulfil himself without God, or even in opposition to him?
The shining example of the Virgin of Nazareth, humble handmaid of the Most High, shows on the contrary that the human being can find his authentic goal in God alone. This is exactly why Bl. Slomsek never tired of teaching that our lives and all social renewal should be rooted in faith.
Brothers and sisters of Slovenia, if you wish to build a society that is a welcoming home for all, make the most of the great gift of faith which came to your homeland more than 1,250 years ago from three cradles of Christianity: Salzburg, Aquileia and Velehrad. Be men and women of faith like Bishop Slomsek!
3. Today we entrust to the Blessed Virgin your city of Maribor, where the new blessed carried out his episcopal ministry. Let us entrust it to her together with the other Dioceses of Slovenia and with your beloved nation.
To her let us dedicate the Pastors, priests, religious, families, children and young people, the hope of the Church and of society, the elderly, the sick and the suffering. May Mary guide you and accompany you, filled with faith, hope and charity, towards the dawn of the now imminent third millennium.

After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the Croatian-speaking faithful:
With great affection I greet the pilgrims from neighbouring Croatia who have wanted to participate in this solemn liturgical celebration. Their presence also gives me the opportunity to recall the innocent victims of wars and totalitarian regimes and, in particular, those who were heaped in the common graves recently discovered near Maribor. May these tragic events never occur again. May God grant the precious gift of peace to Slovenia, to Croatia and to all the countries of Europe and the whole world.
  © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
  ANGELUS
Sunday, 12 september 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. In many countries the month of September coincides with the beginning of school activities after the holiday months. I cordially wish the students, their teachers and the whole scholastic world a peaceful return to their work.
And as a new academic year begins, I would like to call your attention again to the Encyclical Fides et ratio, which I had the joy of signing last year on 14 September. This document deals with the relationship between faith and reason, a crucial theme for culture and for life itself, since faith and reason represent two different, but complementary, ways to reach God.
2. The way of reason leads, so to speak, from the world to God the Creator: it proceeds from investigation into the reality of the world to the search for its ultimate foundation. From a perception of the contingent nature of everything earthly, reason rises to the mystery of the One who is the origin and foundation of all things.
In the knowledge of faith, on the other hand, the process is from God to the world:  God wished to reveal himself in history, with a language and message that go well beyond that of creation. This Revelation, by means of intrinsically connected words and deeds, is the event by which God reaches out to human beings and speaks to them, "in order to invite and receive them into his own company" (Dei Verbum, n. 2). It is an encounter which culminates in Christ, "the fullness of all Revelation" (ibid.).
The "obedience of faith" must be given to God who reveals himself (ibid., n. 5). It is a commitment offered in complete freedom, that is, secure not only from external constraint but also from that blind fideism which feeds on emotions and is subject to every change of sentiment. Reason plays an important role in avoiding fideism, for it is called to discern the signs by which God made his Revelation credible, so that man can accept it and fully adhere to it.
3. May Blessed Mary, whose Holy Name we devoutly honour today, help those who are most directly involved in the field of education and in scientific research, so that they will not give up in the face of difficulties but will successfully complete their journey by discovering the intrinsic convergence and complementarity of reason and faith. Both lead to God, the goal and fulfilment of human beings.
After leading the Angelus and imparting his blessing, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims and visitors in various languages. To the English-speaking he said:
I extend heartfelt greetings to the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors, in particular to the parish groups from Ireland. I invite you all to make this a time of more intense prayer to our Blessed Mother for peace in the world. God bless you and your families!
My thoughts turn again to East Timor, where brutal violence continues to strike and is raging even against the Catholic Church, which long before now has been promoting dialogue and reconciliation.
I cannot fail to express my deep indignation at yet another defeat for all sense of humanity, when, on the dawn of the third millennium, fratricidal hands are again being raised to kill and destroy without pity.
Once again I state my total condemnation of the grave human rights abuses being perpetrated in that territory in a futile attempt to annul the people's will and their legitimate aspirations.
I renew my appeal to the political and military authorities and to the international community to hear the cries of the weak and defenceless and to come immediately to their aid.
Lastly, I ask you to pray to the Blessed Virgin, Queen of Peace, for the dead, the wounded, the refugees, the weeping and the suffering. May she, whom we invoked on the day of her Birth as the "dawn and hope of salvation", be so also for the dear people of Timor, who with constant trust await a better future.
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
5 September 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The months go by and we are drawing closer and closer to the Great Jubilee which will begin the third millennium. At the close of this century the panorama emerging before our eyes includes many shadows, such as the suffering and injustice oppressing individuals and peoples, the violence and the wars that unfortunately continue to bathe so many of the earth's regions in blood. However, there are some comforting rays of light which prompt us to look at the future with hope. Our optimism is based above all on the certainty of God's constant help, which is always given to those who humbly and trustfully implore it.
The Gospel passage offered for our meditation by today's liturgy reminds us of this. Jesus tells his disciples: "Where two or three are gathered in my name, there am I in the midst of them" (Mt 18: 20). The knowledge that Christ remains among his people encourages believers and spurs them to promote authentic solidarity by actively working to build the "civilization of love".

2. In this regard, I would like to recall the immense throng of generous people who, during the 20th century, have offered their lives to Christ by serving their brothers and sisters in humility and love. My thoughts turn in particular to Mother Teresa of Calcutta, whom God called to himself exactly two years ago today. The foundress of the Missionaries of Charity liked to say over and over: "When we help another person, we are rewarded with peace and joy, because we have given meaning to our life". She was a great and appreciated teacher of life, especially for young people, whom she reminded that their "great task is to build peace, starting with their families, and to defend life always and everywhere, especially when it is particularly weak". May her witness be an incentive and an encouragement for many young men and women to put themselves generously at the service of the Gospel.

3. May Mary, whom the faithful never tire of calling upon as a loving Mother, arouse sentiments of peace and active apostolic commitment in every heart. If promoting solidarity and love is a duty for every human being, it is even more so for Christians.
May the Blessed Virgin intercede for all humanity so that the third millennium will be a time of genuine and lasting peace.
Mary, Queen of Peace, pray for us!
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the faithful in various languages. To the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors he said:
I extend a special welcome to the students from the University of Dallas who are beginning their studies in Rome, and to the group of pilgrims from Dundalk, Ireland. Upon all the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors I invoke the protection of the Virgin Mary and the peace of Jesus Christ her Son. God bless you all.
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS

29 August 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,

1. To be disciples of Christ is a demanding commitment, as Jesus himself recalls in this Sunday's Gospel passage: "Whoever wishes to come after me must deny himself, take up his cross and follow me" (Mt 16: 24). Denying oneself and taking up the cross means dying to one's pride, trusting totally in God and living like Christ in total dedication to the Father and to one's brothers and sisters.
Jesus' teaching is echoed by St Paul who, in writing to the Christians of Rome, urges them not to be conformed to the mentality of the world but to offer their life as a living sacrifice, holy and pleasing to God (cf. Rom 12: 1-2). Following Christ involves a journey that is often marked by misunderstanding and suffering. Let no one delude himself: today, as in the past, being Christian means swimming against the tide of this world's mentality and not seeking one's own interest and human approval, but only God's will and the true good of one's neighbour.
2. We see this radical fidelity to Christ shining in the martyrdom of St John the Baptist, whose feast occurs today. The forerunner of Christ chose the path of consistency, bearing total witness to the Lamb of God whose way he had prepared. And he paid with death for his uncompromising love of the truth.
In his footsteps many other disciples of the Lord have confessed the faith by the sacrifice of their life. We are thinking in a special way of the priests, religious and lay people who under the totalitarian and anti-Christian regimes of our century silently gave their lives for love of Christ.
Let us pray that we can follow their example, knowing that anyone who loses his life for the Gospel will find it (cf. Mt 16: 25).
3. May Mary, Queen of confessors of the faith and of martyrs, help us to be strong as we face the tribulations of life and to endure them in union with Christ for the world's salvation.
Let us turn with confidence to her in times of trial. And she, the faithful Virgin, will fill our spirit with courage and instil in us an ever more generous commitment to Gospel fidelity.
I am pleased to greet the new students of the Pontifical North American College in Rome. May your study of theology in the Eternal City deepen your love for Christ and inspire you to be joyful and effective servants of the Gospel. Upon the pilgrims from Ireland and all the English-speaking visitors present at this Angelus prayer I cordially invoke the grace and peace of our Lord Jesus Christ.
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
22 August 1999
  Honour Blessed Virgin as Queen
1. In this Sunday's Gospel, Jesus asks his disciples: "Who do you say that I am?º (Mt 16:15). Simon Peter answers him: "You are the Christ, the Son of the living God" (Mt 16:16). Peter's answer contains the very heart of Christianity. On it rests the service to faith and unity that Peter and his successors are called to give, in accordance with Jesus' words: "And I tell you, you are Peter, and on this rock I will build my church" (Mt 16:18). The Pope's duty is a service to the Church and to humanity; this is why since ancient times he has been known as "Servus servorum Dei - Servant of the servants of God".
2. Today the liturgical calendar also invites us to honour Mary under the title of "Queen". This glorious title in a certain sense completes the image of Mary which last Sunday's liturgy offered us on the Solemnity of the Assumption. In fact, in order to understand properly Mary's royal prerogative we must not forget that there is a Christian meaning of royalty which is very different from the earthly images of power. This is a royal service of love which passes through the Cross (cf. Jn 18:33-37), before becoming radiant in the Resurrection.
May the Virgin Mary, crowned Queen, intercede for us and obtain that we imitate her in faithfully fulfilling Godµs will on earth, to join her one day in the heavenly Jerusalem. In every situation of our life, let us invoke her with trust: "Queen of all saints, pray for us!".
3. At this moment I cannot forget the beloved peoples of Turkey who were recently hit by a violent earthquake. We are continuously receiving news of a situation that has acquired disastrous proportions. Official sources speak of thousands of deaths, which are unfortunately increasing as the rescue-work continues. There are countless injured and homeless, a vast number of buildings have been destroyed and inhabited neighbourhoods razed to the ground.
With constant apprehension and deep affection I am close to these brothers and sisters who have been so harshly tried. I express deep sorrow for the dead and pray merciful God to welcome them in his eternal dwelling-place. I also pray the Lord to alleviate the suffering of those who have been seriously injured and left homeless. May the rescue operations, promoted and coordinated by the authorities, the effective solidarity of volunteers from Turkey and many other countries be a comfort and help to everyone in that beloved nation who is experiencing a time of great tribulation. Let us pray for them now.
The Pope then greeted the faithful in various languages. To the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors he said:
I cordially greet the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors who have joined us for this Angelus prayer, among them pilgrims from St Cecilia's and St Michael's Parish of Port Dover, Ontario. May these summer holidays be a time of joy and spiritual renewal for you and your families.
I assure everyone of my prayers and cordially impart my Apostolic Blessing to you all.
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 15 august 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today the liturgy invites us to contemplate Mary, taken up body and soul into heaven. By a special privilege, she was enriched by divine grace from the moment of her conception, and Christ, who ascended to the right hand of the Father, opened the doors of his kingdom to her, first among human creatures. Now from heaven, where the Queen of the angels and saints is crowned, the Mother of God and of the Church is close to the Christian people before whom she shines as the “new and immaculate woman (who) mediated for the guilt of the first woman” (Sacramentarium Gregorianum, Praefatio in Assumpt., n. 1688).
Let us turn trustingly to her who “shines among the saints like the sun among the stars”. Mary, like a bright star, shows us, pilgrims on earth on our way to heavenly glory, the homeland for which we are bound. She reassures us that we will reach our goal if we do not tire of constantly seeking the “things of above” with living faith, certain hope and fervent love. Not only does she show us the way, but she herself accompanies us and is the “happy Gate of heaven”.
2. In various parts of the world, this ancient Marian feast occurs at the height of the summer season, a time when many people are on holiday, which is sometimes a mere escape and release. But if one's physical constitution properly gains new strength, freedom from work enables one to make more room for the interior life and contemplation of eternal realities. In many tourist localities there are wonderful shrines and welcoming places of Marian devotion. So as to make the most of these days of rest, why not visit them and pause there in prayer, possibly together with the family? The encounter with Mary, in these spiritual oases, will be a comfort and encouragement for a more serene life and a Christian witness that adheres ever more closely to the Gospel.
3. May the Solemnity of the Assumption therefore be an opportunity to experience Mary’s loving presence more deeply. As a sign of sure and comforting hope she is a support and an incentive for believers to be true disciples of Christ. May everyone feel her closeness; may the suffering, the sick and all who turn to her in their difficulties and trials, especially experience her efficacious intercession.
Mary, sweet Queen of heaven, show yourself a Mother to us all! “Give us days of peace, watch over our journey, make us see your Son, full of the joy of heaven” (Hymn for Second Vespers).
Amen.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the faithful in various languages. To the English-speaking pilgrims he said:
I warmly welcome the English-speaking visitors present at this Angelus prayer, especially the group from the Pro-Cathedral in Dublin, Ireland. May the Blessed Virgin Mary, Queen of heaven, be close to all of you during these summer days, and may almighty God bless you and your families with joy and peace.
The Holy Father ended by greeting all the holiday-makers:
I would then like to greet all those who are spending Ferragosto in the various holiday spots and I wish them great serenity and peace. At the same time, I also remember those who, alas, cannot go on holiday and are in conditions of hardship, aggravated by the sultry heat and the closing of certain services over the holiday period. I am thinking especially of the sick, the elderly, prisoners, the unemployed, refugees and everyone who is alone or in difficulty. May Mary extend the comfort of her motherly protection to every heart and every home.
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
8 August 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. In the Gospel passage presented to us in today's liturgy, we once again listen to Jesus' words to his terrified and fearful disciples: 'Take heart, it is I; have no fear' (Mt 14:27). The Evangelist notes that encouraged by the Lord's presence, "those in the boat worshiped him, saying, 'Truly you are the Son of God' " (ibid, 14:33). The Church makes her own this profession of faith in the Son of God, and renews it constantly as she spreads the Good News which he came to bring the people of all times and places.
2. The Servant of God Paul VI, my venerable Predecessor, was also a tireless proclaimer and bold witness of Christ's Gospel. On 6 August, 35 years ago now, he promulgated his first Encycical entitled Ecclesiam suam. Fourteen years later, also on the Feast of the Transfiguration and precisely here in Castel Gandolfo, he was called to contemplate the Lord's face forever in the blessed homeland.
In Ecclesiam suam, this great Pontiff indicated the paths of an inspired ecclesial journey towards the third millennium. The first is a spiritual path and refers to the awareness the Church must have of herself to conform to the vocation entrusted to her by the Redeemer. The second is the moral path and concerns the authentic ascetic, practical and canonical renewal she needs to carry out her mission in the world. The third is the way of the apostolate. For the ecclesial community, the method of dialogue is becoming the way in which to work to bring the Lord's comforting message of salvation everywhere.
3. How is it possible not to thank God for the gift of this prophetic teaching which has guided the journey of the Christian people in the past 35 years? With the Second Vatican Council, wisely led by Paul VI, the Church more closely examined her inmost nature and universal mission. With the constant support of the Holy Spirit, her faith has remained steadfast in these last decades of the century, marked by many lights, but also by numerous shadows, and she is now preparing confidently to cross the threshold of the next millennium.
Let us once again give thanks to the Lord for the fruitful apostolic ministry of the unforgettable Paul VI. At the same time, let us entrust to Mary, Mother of the Church and Star of Evangelization, the future prospects and missionary challenges that lie before us, so that she may guide the steps of all Christians, as she did those of the newborn Church.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the faithful in various languages, telling a group of farmers and their families that he feels particularly close to the well-deserving Italian and European agricultural world. To the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors he said:
I extend a heartfelt greeting to the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors. May this summer period be a time of more intense prayer and spiritual closeness to our Blessed Mother, Queen of Peace. God bless you and your families!
Today is the liturgical feast of St Dominic de Guzmán, the founder of the Dominican Order and a figure of the highest spirituality, who awakened a deep apostolic renewal in the Church.
I address a cordial greeting to the Dominican Fathers, to all the women religious and lay people who are inspired by St Dominic's charism.
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana/font>
 
JOHN PAUL II 
ANGELUS
Sunday, 1 august 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. This Sunday begins the month of August, a month which, at least in Italy and Europe, is the season of summer holidays par excellence. It is a phenomenon of habit, although socio-economic development ensures that holidays are increasingly spread over the span of the year. Thus in many countries August is the month in which those who work far from home return and families are reunited, often in coincidence with traditional religious holidays and patronal feasts.
During this vacation period my thoughts turn especially to families. How often do they endure the hardships of the grinding pace of work, especially in big cities! How often it is hard for them to find a serene and relaxed atmosphere to enjoy intimacy, to talk to one another and to share plans. This is when holidays become above all a favourable time to fill these gaps, so to speak, with “humanity”, peace and festivity.
2. Hence the need for holidays is effectively a time of human renewal, in which, far from the rhythm of daily life, one can rediscover oneself and others in a more balanced and serene dimension.
In this perspective, it is certainly interesting to see that there is an ever greater number of single people and families who benefit from their vacation by spending a few days in so-called “places of the spirit”: monasteries, shrines, hermitages, retreat houses. Almost always these places combine the beauty of the natural scenery with an opportunity to draw spiritual riches from the encounter with God, in reflection and silence, prayer and contemplation.
It would be good if this beneficial tendency were not restricted to the holiday period alone but that satisfactory ways could be found for it to accompany daily activity at other times of year. The real challenge, in fact, lies in safeguarding our inner harmony, so that the pace of daily life will always have that supernatural dimension which each of us needs.
3. Today, let us entrust all who are beginning their vacation and those who have ended it to the protection of Blessed Mary. In a special way let us entrust to her those who for reasons of health or for many other reasons cannot benefit from this holiday season. May people on holiday enjoy the refreshment they deserve and may those who instead do not have this possibility, at any rate feel surrounded by concrete acts of friendship and solidarity.
After praying the Angelus and appealing for peace in Colombia, the Holy Father greeted the faithful in various languages. Here is the text of his greeting to the English-speaking pilgrims.
I am happy to greet the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors who have prayed the Angelus with us: may you always follow the example of the Blessed Virgin Mary who “heard the word of God and kept it” (cf. Lk 11:28). God bless you!
  © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
18 July 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today I have the joy of reciting the Angelus in the heart of Val d'Aosta where I am resting for a while. I say "in the heart" not only because the town of Quart is centrally located in the Vallée, but especially because it is here that we find the Carmel of Mater Misericordiae which I blessed exactly 10 years ago, on 16 July 1989, and which in a certain sense is the contemplative centre of the Church in Val d'Aosta. I extend my most cordial greeting to the Carmelite nuns who live here, daily offering their service of prayer.
A monastery is a true "powerhouse" of spiritual energy that is nourished at the source of contemplation, after the example of prayer to which Jesus devoted himself in solitude, immersing himself totally in dialogue with God the Father, to draw the necessary strength for his saving mission.
The Church prolongs Christ's mission in time: among the many charisms which enrich her, she also cherishes the very precious one of the contemplative life, cultivated in monasteries, as a response to the absolute love of God who in the incarnate Word united himself to humanity in an eternal and unbreakable bond. Monasteries of women express the exclusive union of the Church with Christ her Bridegroom with particular eloquence, reliving the experience of Mary, the Virgin of silence and listening.
2. In this monastic community of Quart, Mary, Queen of Carmel, is venerated with the title "Mother of Mercy". In fact, in giving birth to Jesus, the Blessed Virgin gave the world the supreme Witness of God's merciful love. In this plan of salvation she was not a mere instrument, but indeed a docile cooperator: divine Mercy finds perfect resonance in Mary. In her Immaculate Heart, God's tenderness, his desire to forgive sinners and the throbbing of his fatherly compassion are fittingly reflected.
Mary's motherhood was fulfilled on Calvary where divine Mercy accomplished the supreme act of Redemption in Christ's sacrifice on the Cross. At that tragic and glorious hour, Mary became the Mother of Mercy forever. Carmelite nuns are inspired by her sublime model and offer themselves for the salvation of all. Let us thank the Lord for never ceasing to call chosen souls to be prayerful apostles of his merciful Love in the heart of the Church.
3. From this place that is so important for the Church in Val d'Aosta, I would like to offer a cordial greeting to all the diocesan priests, as well as to the men and women religious. A special thought and greeting go to the Sisters of St Joseph of Aosta, who are beginning their General Chapter. I am also thinking with affection of Aosta's seminary community: I encourage the seminarians to apply themselves to their formation, while I hope that many young men will joyfully and gratefully answer the Lord's call to devote their entire life to serving the Gospel. But Christian life is always a response to the Lord's call, which nevertheless needs to be recognized and accepted with generosity. It was in this perspective that the summer "Mariapolis" of the Focolari Movement was held at La Thuile, and I am pleased that the participants are here now - and we can hear them. I greet you with affection, dear friends, and urge you to be witnesses to God's love in everyday life. I cordially greet all the residents of Val d'Aosta, especially the community of Quart and its mayor.
4. My stay in Val d'Aosta is coming to an end. I take this opportunity, then, to express my heartfelt gratitude to everyone who welcomed me with remarkable warmth, beginning with Bishop Giuseppe Anfossi and the Salesians. I thank the President of the Regional Board, the other authorities, the mayor of Introd, the Forestry Service, the State Police and the Carabinieri, who arranged everything for a calm and peaceful visit.
I once again entrust Val d'Aosta, all the residents and holiday-makers to Blessed Mary, Mater Misericordiae.
The Holy Father also greeted the French-speaking visitors: Dear French-speaking pilgrims who have joined in our Marian prayer, I offer you my cordial welcome. On this day of the week dedicated to the Lord, I ask the Holy Spirit to fill your hearts with the gift of wonder at the beauties of creation. God bless you!
  © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 4 July, 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. At the end of this celebration our hearts are filled with gratitude to God. In his Providence he has supported our human efforts, so that we now have, at the edge of Rome and on the eve of the Great Jubilee, a new Marian shrine built in a place very dear to the inhabitants of Rome and Lazio.
I am deeply moved in recalling my first visit as Bishop of Rome to the Shrine of Divine Love in 1979, 20 years ago. On that occasion I was given a gold olive branch to take to Our Lady of Czestochowa, at whose feet I paused in prayer only a few days ago at the end of my visit to Poland. That gold olive branch seems to suggest a spiritual bond between this Shrine of Divine Love, closely connected with Rome, and that of Jasna Góra, symbol of my earthly homeland. Today I would like to turn my thoughts to the many Marian places where I have gone as a pilgrim during the 21 years of my Pontificate. What a joy it will be for me, if next year I can go to Nazareth where "the Word became flesh and dwelt among us" (Jn 1:14).
2. The 20th International Mariological-Marian Congress will take place at this Shrine of Divine Love from 15 to 24 September 2000 on the theme: "The Mystery of the Trinity and Mary". I am delighted that reflection on Mary's unique role in the mystery of Christ and the Church is being constantly developed in the light of the Second Vatican Ecumenical Council. This deepened understanding has its roots in popular devotion to Mary and, at the same time, helps to nourish, elevate and purify it. I hope that veneration of the Mother of God will help every believer to understand the real meaning of the Jubilee now close at hand and to be inwardly open to God's mercy.
3. O Mary, beloved Bride of Divine Love, always bless this place and the pilgrims who come here with your motherly presence. Obtain for the city of Rome, for Italy and for the world the gift of peace which your Son, Jesus, left as an inheritance to all who believe in him. O Mother, may no one ever leave this shrine without receiving in his heart the comforting certainty of Divine Love. Amen.
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Tuesday, 29 June 1999
Solemnity of Sts Peter and Paul
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. Today the Church celebrates the Solemnity of the holy Apostles, Peter and Paul. It is a great feast for the city of Rome, which venerates them as its patrons, since it was here that these two heralds of the Gospel shed their blood for Christ.
This morning I celebrated Mass in the Vatican Basilica at the tomb of the Fisherman from Galilee to whom Jesus entrusted his flock. Attending the liturgy, as a sign of brotherhood, was a delegation from the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople.
In accordance with an ancient and very significant tradition, the Metropolitan Archbishops whom I appointed this past year also took part in this solemn celebration. I conferred the pallium on them, a liturgical sign which expresses their communion with the See and the Successor of Peter. The Metropolitans come from all parts of the world, and their gathering today round the Bishop of Rome eloquently expresses the catholic unity of the Church, which has spread to every continent.
I greet and thank the pilgrims who have accompanied their Pastors to Rome on this happy occasion: may Sts Peter and Paul obtain abundant graces for their Ecclesial Communities.
2. Dear brothers and sisters, today I signed a document which will be published tomorrow. It is a Letter Concerning Pilgrimage to the Places Linked to the History of Salvation. The imminence of the Great Jubilee prompted me to offer a reflection connected with my wish to go personally, God willing, on a special Jubilee pilgrimage to certain places linked to salvation history and especially to the Incarnation of the Word of God.
I would like to stress the exclusively religious and spiritual meaning of this pilgrimage, which cannot, therefore, be given any other interpretation. To visit Ur of the Chaldees, the land of Abraham's origins, or Mount Sinai, symbol of the Exodus and the Covenant, and above all, Nazareth, Bethlehem and Jerusalem, means to follow the roads which divine Revelation itself has taken.
I have a great longing to go and pray in these places where the Living God left his mark, some of which I visited in 1965 when I was Archbishop of Kraków. To return there as a pilgrim Pope on the occasion of the Year 2000 is an intention which I entrust to the Lord and to Our Blessed Lady, trusting also in your prayers. After leading the Angelus prayer, the Holy Father said:
In recent days various efforts have been made to find a negotiated solution to the conflict which for a year now has been devastating the Democratic Republic of the Congo. To the beloved peoples of that country, and especially to the Catholic community gathered round its Bishops - some of whom have taken part in today's celebration, I would like to express a thought of spiritual closeness and encouragement, urging them to face together the difficulties of the moment and the challenges of the future. I cannot forget the many other situations of crisis and suffering that mark the African continent. My solidarity reaches out particularly to the Church in Rwanda, also harshly tried by the imprisonment of one of its Pastors.
I ask everyone to pray that, through the intercession of Our Lady and the glorious Apostles Peter and Paul, the chains of evil (cf. Vespers hymn), which unfortunately prevent the hopes and longings for peace from being realized, will be broken.
The Holy Father also greeted the pilgrims in various languages. To the English-speaking he said: I extend warm greetings to the pilgrims from English-speaking countries who are here with the Archbishops who have received the pallium. May your visit strengthen you in the apostolic faith, to which Sts Peter and Paul bore witness in this city by their martyrdom.
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 27 June 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. Today St Peter's Square is the scene of an unusual event: the sacred portrayal of the so-called "Mysteries" performed by pilgrims from Molise, to whom I extend a cordial greeting. I thank Archbishop Armando Dini of Campobasso-Boiano, the organizers, the bearers, the performers and all who have helped to present this vivid expression of popular piety.
Since the Middle Ages it has been a widespread practice in various European countries to organize processions of tableaux, called "Mysteries", for certain important liturgical feasts. In Campobasso this practice underwent considerable development in the 1700s in connection with the feast of Corpus Christi. There are 13 live groups, ingeniously assembled on wrought-iron structures and depicting, in order, St Michael the Archangel, the Immaculate Conception, Abraham, the Holy Family, St Mary Magdalene, St Crispin, St Januarius, St Anthony the Abbot, St Nicholas of Bari, St Leonard of Noblat, St Isidore, St Roch and the Assumption.
2. The "Mysteries" have not only a folkloric character but above all a religious value. In fact, by their very sequential order, they invite us to meditate on the history of salvation.
As we prepare for the Angelus prayer, I would like to mention how in this sacred performance Mary enjoys the unique importance that is her due. The "Mystery" of the Immaculate Conception, which follows immediately after the allusive portrayal of the faithful angels' primordial victory over the ones who rebelled (cf. Rv 12:7), recalls that God's grace was present at the beginning of human history. His providential plan of salvation defeats the power of the Evil One. The last "Mystery" depicts Holy Mary's Assumption body and soul into heaven: it presents the glory into which the Blessed Virgin has already entered and to which all who accept Christ's Redemption are called. Other "Mysteries" depict saints who are particularly dear to popular devotion and highlight the marvels that God's merciful love has accomplished in man down the centuries.
3. I earnestly hope that these significant forms of popular piety, which sprung from faith-filled communities, will continue today to be effective tools of evangelization.
May they serve as an encouragement to prayer and contemplation, and instil, especially in young people, the same spiritual enthusiasm as in past generations. May the Virgin Mary, who accompanies the Christian people on their way, help us to express in our daily lives the "Mystery" of Redemption, preparing in this way to celebrate the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000.
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 20 June 1999 
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. Last Thursday I returned from a long pilgrimage to Poland, and my mind and heart are still filled with images of the places I visited and especially of the throngs of compatriots and other faithful from various countries who gave me a moving welcome wherever I went. Memories and feelings of deep intensity come back to mind. How can I not thank the Lord for this great opportunity he gave me? Today I would especially like to offer him my gratitude. I would also like to extend a cordial "thank you" to everyone who contributed to the success of this apostolic journey, with a special embrace to my Brother Bishops, who offered me hospitality in their Dioceses. It was an unforgettable experience of faith and brotherhood.
2. "God is love" was the theme that marked this pilgrimage at every stage: only the Gospel of Love, the Gospel of the Beatitudes, can bring peace to hearts and make social relations tranquil and fruitful. Solidarity and peaceful understanding between individuals and peoples flow from God's love and from peace with him.
As I say these words, my thoughts turn in particular to Europe, whose wounds are still bleeding from the recent war in Yugoslavia; I am also thinking of two Asian countries, India and Pakistan, where peace is seriously jeopardized.
Let us pray together that the peace process will be strengthened in Europe; let us pray that India and Pakistan will return to the path of dialogue and make an immediate effort to put an end to the fighting with its burden of violence and death.
May the peoples of Europe, Asia and the other continents draw from the wealth of spiritual values in their history the motivation for a renewed commitment to mutual respect and to generous, honest collaboration.
3. May the Blessed Virgin, to whom I turned many times on my recent journey and especially during my visit to the Shrine of Czêstochowa, intercede for us and strengthen everyone's desire for conversion, reconciliation and peace.
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II 
ANGELUS
Warsaw, 13 June 1999
    “My soul glorifies the Lord and my Spirit rejoices in God my Saviour” (Lk 1:46)
Together with Mary, the Mother of Jesus, we praise God and exult in him, “because he has looked upon his servant in her lowliness” (Lk 1:48) and has chosen her to cooperate in the work of our salvation. Thanks to her, God the Father has done great things in the Holy Spirit, through his Son Jesus Christ. Her generous fiat has, in a sense, opened a new path in history, along which for two thousand years the Incarnate God has faithfully walked with man. Mary, Mother of Christ and Mother of the Church, never ceases to point to this presence of Christ, she helps us to renew continually our acceptance of it, to meditate upon it in our hearts and to rejoice in it.
Together with Mary, we give thanks to God for those from our own generation who are witnesses to his presence. We give him thanks, believing that from him comes the power which enables the weak to persevere in love, despite trials and difficult experiences; may the example of the martyrs, raised today to the altars, strengthen our religious life, our hope and our confidence; may it become a support for those who are tempted to doubt or despair because of the difficulties of daily life. May we never cease to draw from Christ, the Son of Mary, the strength which fills the human heart with the courage of faith, with trust in Divine Providence and with the love that is stronger than death.
We praise God also for the faith, hope and love of the two confessors, who today have been raised to the glory of the altars: Regina Protmann and Edmund Bojanowski. Their total self-giving to the service of Christ, the Church and their neighbour, especially to the service of those in need of material and spiritual support, became the path of witness to the love of the Father who is in Heaven. For them it became the path of holiness. For the disciples of Christ today, may their witness lead to a new awareness of the needs of others; may it inspire them to serve others selflessly, in a spirit of love of God and neighbour. May it indicate the path for all those who desire holiness.
Mother of the Incarnate Word, Our Lady of Graces, protect Warsaw, its people and all our homeland! Guard the presence of your Son in the hearts of all the baptized, so that they will always remember their dignity as men and women redeemed by the blood of Christ, called to place their trust in God and to serve their neighbour with love. Implore for your people the perseverance they need to carry out the will of the Heavenly Father and to obtain the salvation promised. May the seed of holiness, scattered so richly on Polish soil and given life by the Holy Spirit, grow constantly under your protection, and may it bear rich fruit for the coming generations.
   
JOHN PAUL II 
ANGELUS
Warsaw, 13 June 1999
    “My soul glorifies the Lord and my Spirit rejoices in God my Saviour” (Lk 1:46)
Together with Mary, the Mother of Jesus, we praise God and exult in him, “because he has looked upon his servant in her lowliness” (Lk 1:48) and has chosen her to cooperate in the work of our salvation. Thanks to her, God the Father has done great things in the Holy Spirit, through his Son Jesus Christ. Her generous fiat has, in a sense, opened a new path in history, along which for two thousand years the Incarnate God has faithfully walked with man. Mary, Mother of Christ and Mother of the Church, never ceases to point to this presence of Christ, she helps us to renew continually our acceptance of it, to meditate upon it in our hearts and to rejoice in it.
Together with Mary, we give thanks to God for those from our own generation who are witnesses to his presence. We give him thanks, believing that from him comes the power which enables the weak to persevere in love, despite trials and difficult experiences; may the example of the martyrs, raised today to the altars, strengthen our religious life, our hope and our confidence; may it become a support for those who are tempted to doubt or despair because of the difficulties of daily life. May we never cease to draw from Christ, the Son of Mary, the strength which fills the human heart with the courage of faith, with trust in Divine Providence and with the love that is stronger than death.
We praise God also for the faith, hope and love of the two confessors, who today have been raised to the glory of the altars: Regina Protmann and Edmund Bojanowski. Their total self-giving to the service of Christ, the Church and their neighbour, especially to the service of those in need of material and spiritual support, became the path of witness to the love of the Father who is in Heaven. For them it became the path of holiness. For the disciples of Christ today, may their witness lead to a new awareness of the needs of others; may it inspire them to serve others selflessly, in a spirit of love of God and neighbour. May it indicate the path for all those who desire holiness.
Mother of the Incarnate Word, Our Lady of Graces, protect Warsaw, its people and all our homeland! Guard the presence of your Son in the hearts of all the baptized, so that they will always remember their dignity as men and women redeemed by the blood of Christ, called to place their trust in God and to serve their neighbour with love. Implore for your people the perseverance they need to carry out the will of the Heavenly Father and to obtain the salvation promised. May the seed of holiness, scattered so richly on Polish soil and given life by the Holy Spirit, grow constantly under your protection, and may it bear rich fruit for the coming generations.
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Pelplin
Sunday, 6 June 1999
  “Blessed rather are those who hear the word of God and keep it” (Lk 11:28). Jesus knew his Mother well! He knew that she listened to the word of God “with a good and perfect heart” (Lk 8:15). He knew that she kept it “faithfully” (cf. Lk 2:51) in her heart (cf. Lk 2:19) and pondered on its meaning (cf. Lk 1:29). She, the Mother of the Son of God, dedicated her own life entirely to faithful keeping of the word of God. She listened to God without ceasing, she meditated upon the words and events, receiving this Revelation with her whole being in the “obedience of faith”.
The first and most perfect fruit of this giving of herself to God’s word was her virginal motherhood. With faith, she welcomed the eternal Word who, through the action of the Holy Spirit, became flesh in her for the salvation of man. Obedient to the Father’s will, she was not only the mother and protector of the Son of God but also his faithful collaborator in the work of Redemption. The fruit of her life came to maturity under the Cross, where, in a manner which was most tragic from the human point of view, the truth that God is love was revealed. In the spirit of this divine love, in obedience to her Son’s call, she received us as her children in the Apostle John. When, after the resurrection and ascension of Christ into heaven, she persevered, together with the Apostles, in prayer (cf. Acts 1:14) and with them experienced the descent of the Holy Spirit, she became the Mother of the Church which was coming into being. This mystical motherhood was fully revealed in the mystery of her Assumption into heaven.
From that moment on, our gaze is fixed on her example, praying that she, our Guide in the faith, will teach us to listen to and keep every word that God addresses to us. Blessed indeed are those who listen to the word of God and keep it (cf. Lk 11:28). May we too share in the blessing which came to rest on Mary, so that by hearing God’s word and keeping it, we may become witnesses to God, who is love.
  © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 6 June 1999, Pelplin
  “Blessed rather are those who hear the word of God and keep it” (Lk 11:28). Jesus knew his Mother well! He knew that she listened to the word of God “with a good and perfect heart” (Lk 8:15). He knew that she kept it “faithfully” (cf. Lk 2:51) in her heart (cf. Lk 2:19) and pondered on its meaning (cf. Lk 1:29). She, the Mother of the Son of God, dedicated her own life entirely to faithful keeping of the word of God. She listened to God without ceasing, she meditated upon the words and events, receiving this Revelation with her whole being in the “obedience of faith”.
The first and most perfect fruit of this giving of herself to God’s word was her virginal motherhood. With faith, she welcomed the eternal Word who, through the action of the Holy Spirit, became flesh in her for the salvation of man. Obedient to the Father’s will, she was not only the mother and protector of the Son of God but also his faithful collaborator in the work of Redemption. The fruit of her life came to maturity under the Cross, where, in a manner which was most tragic from the human point of view, the truth that God is love was revealed. In the spirit of this divine love, in obedience to her Son’s call, she received us as her children in the Apostle John. When, after the resurrection and ascension of Christ into heaven, she persevered, together with the Apostles, in prayer (cf. Acts 1:14) and with them experienced the descent of the Holy Spirit, she became the Mother of the Church which was coming into being. This mystical motherhood was fully revealed in the mystery of her Assumption into heaven.
From that moment on, our gaze is fixed on her example, praying that she, our Guide in the faith, will teach us to listen to and keep every word that God addresses to us. Blessed indeed are those who listen to the word of God and keep it (cf. Lk 11:28). May we too share in the blessing which came to rest on Mary, so that by hearing God’s word and keeping it, we may become witnesses to God, who is love.
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
  JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Ancona (Italy)
Sunday 30 May 1999
    Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. At the end of this inspiring Eucharistic celebration our thoughts turn to Blessed Mary, venerated in many churches, chapels and shrines in the Archdiocese of Ancona-Osimo. Here I would like to mention the shrines of Our Lady of Sorrows of Campocavallo in Osimo, Our Lady of Tornazzano in Filottrano, Our Lady of the Sacred Heart of Jesus in Osimo, and Our Lady of the Rosary in Falconara.
In your Cathedral of St Cyriacus, whose millennium we are celebrating, there is a chapel dedicated to Our Lady Queen of All Saints, the city's principal patroness. From this stadium I go as a pilgrim in spirit to the artistic shrine that frames the miraculous image of Our Lady, to whom Ancona's people are so devoted. It is a simple but very expressive painting which, according to tradition, a Venetian sailor gave to the cathedral canons of Ancona as an ex voto offering after he had escaped shipwreck. I would like to entrust your archdiocesan community and all the city's inhabitants to Mary. May she always protect and preserve you from the billows of life.
2. From this city, which is linked with the East by tradition, I cannot help but turn my gaze across the Adriatic Sea, which for many refugees represents a difficult path of hope. Unfortunately, in Kosovo and in the Yugoslav Republic oppression and violence continue unabated, with many human victims and great environmental damage. Today I renew my heartfelt invitation to peace. It is an invitation which becomes a prayer that Mary will obtain for us such an essential and irreplaceable gift. During this month of May, in response to my appeal, you too have been reciting the Holy Rosary each day, the "Rosary of peace", in union with believers throughout the world.
In view of the continuing violence, let us make a trusting plea for the peoples of Kosovo and Yugoslavia, for too long the victims of a situation that marks a serious defeat for humanity just after the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Let us also remember other peoples, especially on the African continent, who are paying an unacceptable toll of human lives, hunger, poverty and humiliation due to protracted fratricidal conflicts, often ignored by public opinion.
3. In lifting our thoughts to the Holy Trinity, an ocean of love and peace, let us pray that humanity can find the courage of reconciliation. May dialogue, solidarity and love prevail over the many forms of pride and deceit. May God enlighten the consciences of those responsible, so that they will put the defence of the basic rights of the human person above every other consideration. Every time, in fact, that hatred and violence triumph, it is man who is defeated. May the Lord comfort and help the thousands of children, women, elderly and sick who are innocent victims of the war. I would also like to mention in this prayer those who died in the Second World War, including my compatriots and contemporaries, some of whom, my own classmates, died here near Ancona.
Mary, Queen of Peace, Queen of All Saints, pray for us and obtain peace for the world!
   
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA COELI
Sunday, 16 may 1999
1. I joyfully greet all of you who have gathered today in St Peter's Square for the Day of Charity organized by the Pontifical Council “Cor Unum”. Some of you hold positions of responsibility in those great Catholic aid organizations which expend considerable effort in trying to combat poverty in the world. Others represent that vast family of “volunteers” who in many parts of the world freely dedicate themselves to serving their neighbour. At the time of natural disasters, emergency situations, wars and illness, hosts of men and women in a spirit of generous altruism care for all who are in trouble and devote time and energy to them in the image of the Good Samaritan. It is precisely the Good Samaritan, spoken of in the Gospel, which is the icon of the volunteer who makes himself a neighbour to his needy brother or sister (cf. Lk 10:30ff.).
May God grant that this peaceful “army of hope” may extend its work far and wide, with initiatives to defend human rights, to aid those in need and to promote the culture of solidarity and the civilization of love. 
2. In view of this encouraging growth of organizations for assistance and human development, what is the specific contribution that Christians are called to make? In the light of Gospel teaching, they know that they must bear witness above all and in every possible way to the supreme commandment of love: “You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, with all your mind and with all your strength ... You shall love your neighbour as yourself” (Mk 12:30-31). To love God and to love one's neighbour: this is the believer's vocation and mission. Love for one's brothers and sisters stems from the love of God and can attain its fullness only in those who live the love of God. Philanthropy, however praiseworthy, proves impotent when faced with certain forms of human destitution.
When it remains faithful to the mandate and example of Jesus, the charitable work of Christians proclaims and bears witness to Christ who gives his life, heals the human heart, cares for the wounds inflicted by hatred and sin, and brings joy and peace to all.
The world of volunteer service, which brings together people of every social background, with various cultural and religious viewpoints, is waiting for Christians to make their specific contribution. If they do not notice this apostolic need, they run the risk of failing in their own evangelizing mission of being “the salt of the earth” and “the light of the world” (cf. Mt 5:13-14).
3. Therefore I turn to you, dear brothers and sisters, who take the inspiration for your work from the Gospel. You have received the gift of charity: know that you are the witness and stewards of this gift. Your mission must never be reduced to being mere social workers or generous philanthropists.
The Gospel of charity is the great prophetic message for our times. It is the language of evangelization most readily understood even by those who still do not know Christ. He himself is present in our needy brother or sister. His own words assure us of this: “As you did it to one of the least of these my brethren, you did it to me” (Mt 25:40).
In thanking you for everything you do, I say to you on the Church's behalf: show to the people of our time Christ, who died and rose for the salvation of every human being without distinction of race or culture! He is the hope shining on humanity's horizon.
May Mary, the Virgin who listens and the loving Mother of all human beings, sustain you. And may you be accompanied by my Blessing, which I gladly impart to you, to your initiatives and to everyone you meet in your activities of human advancement and Christian solidarity.
Today the Church is celebrating the World Day of Social Communications. In extending a cordial greeting to all who work in the world of the mass media, I encourage them — as I wrote in my annual Message for this day — to see that the means of social communication are always a friendly presence accompanying the men and women of our time, helping them in their search for God, goodness and truth.
I am pleased this morning to welcome a large group of Kosovar refugees, the guests of several Italian Caritas agencies. Dear brothers and sisters, in this month of May we are praying in a particular way for peace. May the intercession of Blessed Mary obtain this for you and for all people tormented by war.
I affectionately greet the pilgrims present, particularly the group that came on horseback from Tuscany along the ancient Via Francigena, and the amateur cyclists from Senigallia.
I also greet the faithful from the Diocese of Lugano, the new revenue officers from Mondovì, the young people from Treviglio, the pupils of the Don Guanella School in Como and the children from the Francesco Gattola School in Massa Lubrense, with my best wishes to the “Immacolatine” Sisters who are celebrating the centenary of the death of their founder, Fr Francesco Gattola.
© Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA COELI
Sunday, 9 may 1999
  Christ is risen!
1. “Blessed be the name of the Lord, now and always and forever and ever”!
With the words of the final hymn of the Divine Liturgy, I would like to offer fervent thanks to the Lord for this time of joyful brotherhood and intense prayer that we have just experienced.
Blessed be the name of the Lord for the Romanian people. From the very beginning of their evangelization, they have never ceased to sing the praises of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. Even in the darkest moments of their history they continued to trust in God as the Psalmist said: “By day the Lord commands his steadfast love; and at night his song is with me, a prayer to the God of my life” (Ps 41 [42]:8).
I am thinking of the wealth of spirituality and holiness which have enriched Romania’s age-old history. I recall with reverence the witness borne during the persecution of so many Christians, both famous and unknown, who remained steadfast in the faith and continued to spread the Gospel, sometimes at the price of their own lives. Their fidelity is a sign of hope for all the Lord’s disciples. Indeed, communion among Christians of different denominations, real although imperfect, is confirmed by martyrdom for Christ and perfected in the Communion of Saints.
2. Among the many witnesses of Christ that flourished in Romania, I would like to recall the monk of Rohia, Nicolae Steinhardt, an exceptional example of a believer and man of culture, who had a special insight into the immense richness of the treasure common to the Christian Churches.
In particular, I thank the Lord for the witness of faith and hope given in Romania by the members of the Orthodox Church and the Catholic Church during our difficult century. Thanks to them, persecution and suffering became precious opportunities for sanctification and evangelization in this region.
May a single hymn of praise to the name of the Lord rise from the Romanian Orthodox Church and the Romanian Catholic Church! May it form a symphony of voices to express the heartfelt brotherhood of mutual relations and to implore the full communion of all believers. The Romanian Orthodox Church and the Catholic Church, founded on the apostolic succession, have the same Word of the Lord preserved in Holy Scripture and the same sacraments. In particular, they have kept the same priesthood and celebrate the one Sacrifice of Christ, through which he builds up and gives growth to his Church.
3. Blessed be the name of the Lord for what is being achieved in obedience to Christ’s command. I am thinking here of the international dialogue between the Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church as a whole, and between the Greek-Catholic Church and the Romanian Orthodox Church. I am also thinking of the respectful pastoral cooperation between the Orthodox and Catholic faithful which is growing at various levels and is also bearing promising fruit among young people, as well as of the efforts to produce an interdenominational translation of the Bible. May their mutual relations always be free of any kind of fear or suspicion and show that the purpose of all pastoral work is to help each person grow in fidelity to the one Lord.
In a few months we will celebrate the 2,000th anniversary of the birth of Jesus Christ. This will be an extraordinary and important Jubilee for Christians and for the whole human race, in which Christianity has had such great significance during these two millenniums. Therefore the members of the Catholic Church, together with Christians of other denominations, will rightly celebrate the event with heartfelt gratitude to God for the gift of Redemption.
The Great Jubilee of the Year 2000 urges Christians to look at the future with a better awareness of the challenges they will face in the new millennium. One that stands out is the search for unity among all believers in Christ. I hope that the third Christian millennium will find us, if not completely united, at least closer to full communion.
4. Blessed be the name of the Lord for your kindness and courtesy in welcoming me these past few days.
I would like to express my warm and cordial gratitude first of all to His Beatitude Patriarch Teoctist, to the Holy Synod, the clergy and the faithful of the Orthodox Church of Romania who have opened their arms and their hearts to me!
May the Lord bless this ancient and illustrious Church as she fulfils her pastoral mission, and may he lead all believers to offer the world a renewed and joyful witness of full communion with one another and of courageous fidelity to the Gospel!
I extend an affectionate and fatherly greeting to the faithful of the Catholic Church. God has given me the joy of seeing your faces and praying with you. Like Paul to the elders of Miletus, I say to you: “I commend you to God and to the word of his grace” (Acts 20:32).
I invoke the protection of Mary, the glorious Mother of God, upon all the citizens of beloved Romania. May her children, who in the course of history have learned to trust in her powerful intercession, always be able to find in her a sure guide in advancing towards a future of prosperity and peace and in helping build a more just and more fraternal homeland.
Amen!
  
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA COELI
Sunday, 2 may 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. The solemn Eucharistic liturgy in which I had the joy of beatifying Padre Pio of Pietrelcina has ended in St Peter's Square. I am now pleased to be here with you who have come from various parts of Italy and the world to this Piazza San Giovanni in Laterano to pay homage to the new blessed and to show him your affection. Together with you I would like cordially to greet the many faithful who have gathered in prayer at the friary of the Capuchin Friars in San Giovanni Rotondo and those who are following the beatification ceremony on radio and television. This is a great and moving display of faith that enables us to experience concretely the reality of the Church, the family of God, which rejoices today in the holiness of one of her generous and faithful children.
By his teaching and example, Padre Pio invites us to pray, to receive divine mercy through the sacrament of Penance and to love our neighbour. He invites us, in particular, to love and venerate the Virgin Mary. His devotion to Our Lady was apparent in every aspect of his life: in his words and writings, in his teaching and in the advice he gave to his many spiritual children. A true son of St Francis of Assisi, from whom he learned to call upon Mary with splendid expressions of praise and love (cf. “Greeting to the Virgin”, in Fonti Francescane, 59), the new blessed never tired of teaching the faithful a tender and profound devotion to Our Lady that was rooted in the Church's authentic tradition. In the privacy of the confessional, as in his preaching, he continually urged the faithful: love Our Lady! At the end of his earthly life, when the time came to express his last wishes, he turned his thoughts, as he had done throughout his life, to Blessed Mary: “Love Our Lady and help others to love her. Always recite the Rosary”.
2. With deep sorrow and concern my thoughts turn again today to nearby Yugoslavia, and my affection embraces everyone there who is weeping, suffering and dying. Once again I raise my voice to beg — in the name of God — that that oppression of man by man may cease, that the tools of destruction and death be stopped and that every possible channel be opened for aiding those who have been forced to leave their lands amid unspeakable atrocities. May dialogue be resumed, with that intelligence and creativity which God has given man to resolve tensions and conflicts and to build a society based on proper respect for every human being.
With all my strength I invite you, brothers and sisters, to pray intensely throughout this month of May, imploring Our Lady for the gift of peace in the Balkans and in the all too many places in the world where violence reigns, fomented by prejudice and hatred towards those who have different ethnic orgins, religious convictions and political ideas. In addition to the Balkans, my thoughts turn to Africa, the continent now drenched in blood by the greatest number of wars: power struggles, ethnic conflicts and indifference to others are slowly choking it.
During this month of May may prayers be organized in every Diocese to implore the Blessed Virgin, Queen of Peace, with one voice in the Church so that in the Balkans, on the African continent and in every part of the world peacemakers may burgeon who will forget their own interests and be willing to work for the common good.
May Padre Pio, a most loving son of the “Queen of Heaven”, intercede for us and for all, so that sentiments of forgiveness, reconciliation and peace may flow from human hearts at the end of this millennium and the beginning of the new, third millennium, for which we are preparing.
  © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II 
REGINA COELI
Sunday, 25 april 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The Holy Mass at which I had the joy of conferring priestly ordination on 31 deacons from the Diocese of Rome ended a few moments ago in St Peter's Basilica. These new priests are a great gift to the Roman ecclesial community and the universal Church. Let us thank the Lord and pray that the newly ordained, who come from various countries, will be faithful to God who has called them to the service of the altar.
2. Today's inspiring celebration occurs on the Fourth Sunday of Easter, the World Day of Prayer for Vocations, whose theme this year is: “The Father calls to eternal life”. How important for human salvation are vocations to the priesthood and the consecrated life! God continues to show himself a Father through individuals who bear witness in word and deed to their unlimited dedication to serving their brethren, sometimes even to the point of martyrdom (cf. Message for the 36th World Day of Prayer for Vocations, Introduction).
Jesus the Good Shepherd, who came so that the world might have life and have it abundantly (cf. Jn 10:10), is a model for every priest. The boundless horizons of the new evangelization unfold before the eyes of the Good Shepherd. The Fourth International Priests' Meeting, organized by the Congregation for the Clergy and to be held in the Holy Land from 22 to 27 of June, will be an excellent occasion for priests from all countries to walk together towards the Great Jubilee and to enter the new millennium with renewed fidelity and an ardent missionary spirit. I assure you of my prayers for the success of this meeting, which I hope will be well attended by priests from various countries on the different continents.
3. Let us entrust to Mary, beloved daughter of the Father and model of every generous response to the divine call, the prayers which the whole Church is offering today for vocations. In particular, let us invoke her motherly protection upon the new priests of the Diocese of Rome, upon all who will receive priestly ordination this year and upon those who will embrace the consecrated life.
May the Blessed Virgin help parents to understand the value of vocations of special consecration and to foster their growth with prayer and by their own example. As we turn our gaze to the third millennium, the Lord Jesus' words ring out more clearly than ever: “The harvest is plentiful, but the labourers are few; pray therefore the Lord of the harvest to send out labourers into his harvest!” (Mt 9:37-38). May the Mother of the Church sustain our prayer!
After praying the Regina Caeli, the Holy Father said:
In view of the great suffering in today's world, particularly that caused by war, the need to spread and bear practical witness to the Gospel of charity becomes ever more urgent. This is the context for the meeting organized by the Pontifical Council “Cor Unum”, which I will have the joy to preside at on Sunday, 16 May. Many witnesses of charity will participate and I will celebrate a solemn Eucharist for them in St Peter's Square. It will be an important occasion to express the Church's encouragement to those who devote themselves to their brothers and sisters in need and who are working to build a future of genuine peace in a society of greater brotherhood and solidarity.
  © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CAELI
Divine Mercy Sunday, 11 April 1999 
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. At the end of the Octave of Easter - with a special thought for our Orthodox brothers and sisters who are celebrating this solemnity today - I make my own the words of the Apostle Peter, proclaimed in the liturgy: "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ! By his great mercy we have been born anew to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead" (1 Pt 1:3). On their way to the Jubilee, the entire People of God raise a hymn of thanksgiving to God the Father who, in Christ's paschal mystery, revealed to the world his face and, so to speak, his heart "rich in mercy" (Eph 2:4).
This Sunday is also called Divine Mercy Sunday: in this year dedicated to God the Father, it is an excellent occasion to enter into the authentic Jubilee spirit as individuals and as the Church, in accordance with Jesus' own words: "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has sent me ... to announce a year of favour from the Lord" (Lk 4:18- 19). I am very pleased that many priests and faithful have gathered this morning in St Peter's Square for a solemn Eucharist celebrated by Cardinal Fiorenzo Angelini, whom I cordially greet, and with him everyone present, as I express my pleasure with your devotion to the merciful Jesus.
I warmly encourage you to be apostles of divine mercy, like Bl. Faustina Kowalska, wherever you live and work.
2. How could we not note the glaring contrast between the invitation to mercy and forgiveness echoing in today's liturgy and the violence of the tragic conflicts which are soaking the Balkan region in blood? May peace prevail at last! Here I renew the appeal dictated not only by faith but first of all by reason: may people be able to live together in harmony in their lands; may weapons be silenced and dialogue resumed!
My thoughts turn constantly to those who are suffering the harsh consequences of the war and I pray the risen Lord, the Prince of Peace, to give us the gift of his peace.
3. I would like to invite all believers to intensify their prayer for peace, because God offers what sometimes seems almost humanly impossible to those who request it as a gift of his mercy.
For this reason, let us invoke the intercession of Blessed Mary. Mother of Mercy, we pray to you to help us set out courageously on the way of love and peace.
After praying the Regina Caeli, the Holy Father said:
Today, as I have just said, the Orthodox Churches are celebrating Holy Easter. I join our Orthodox brothers and sisters in joyful prayer and offer them my heartfelt good wishes. May the peace Christ announced to his disciples on the day of his Resurrection always be effective among believers. At this time my thoughts turn, in particular, to those who are suffering from the war. May the hope for peace sustain them in this harsh trial and make them more and more the artisans of a coexistence that respects the rights of each individual and is marked by fraternal solidarity.
I extend a special greeting to the Marthoma Christians from the Syro-Malabar and Syro-Malankara Churches, who today celebrate the appearance of the risen Lord to the Apostle St Thomas. I pray that almighty God will continue to bless your communities with vigorous faith and generosity in works of charity.
I affectionately greet all the pilgrims present, particularly the faithful from the parishes of St Ambrose of Grion in Trebaseleghe, Padua, of St Mary and St Anthony Marostica in the Diocese of Vicenza, as well as the confirmands from St Symphorosa Parish in Bagni di Tivoli. I also greet the group of "Italian Restaurateurs Abroad".
I extend a special welcome to the young people who have gathered from various Italian regions to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Youth Tourist Centre. In 1949, the young people of Catholic Action founded this apostolic initiative to promote tourism that would be a source of spiritual enrichment. This is what I also hope today, as I cordially bless you all.
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CAELI
Castel Gandolfo
Easter Monday, 5 April 1999
  1. The proclamation "Christ my hope is arisen!" (Sequence) continues to echo in today's liturgy. In this way the spiritual joy of Easter is prolonged and expands in the Church and in the hearts of the faithful.
Christ's Resurrection is the most overwhelming event in human history. This event gave everyone new hope: from now on hope no longer means waiting for something to happen. It means being certain that something has happened because "the Lord is risen and reigns immortal!".
The words that proclaimed the Resurrection were spoken for the first time by an angel beside Christ's empty tomb. To the women who had gone to the tomb at dawn on the day after the sabbath he said: "He is not here, for he is risen" (Mt 28:6). And "with great joy [they] ran" (Mt 28:8) to tell his disciples. For the fearful and discouraged disciples, the heavenly messenger's announcement, made more evident by the appearances of the Risen One, was confirmation of what the Lord had foretold. Comforted by this certainty and filled with the Holy Spirit, they then set out on the paths of the world to ring out the joyful Easter proclamation.
2. Dear brothers and sisters, on this "Monday of the Angel" the liturgy invites us to listen again to the angel's words which tell us of that day's great event. In them lies the living heart of Christianity. They are an indication of the mystery which explains everything. After the rites of Holy Week, our eyes now behold Christ risen. We too are called to a personal encounter with him and to become his heralds and witnesses, like the women and the disciples.
"Christ my hope is arisen!", we repeat today, asking him for the courage of fidelity and perseverance in doing good. Above all, let us ask for peace, a gift won for us by his Death and Resurrection. Let us pray that the precious gift of peace will be given especially to our brethren in Kosovo, where the Easter bells did not ring a festive peal and, unfortunately, the war continues with destruction, deportation and death.
3. Let us entrust our heartfelt petition to Mary. "Queen of heaven, you who rejoice because the Son you were chosen to bear has risen", obtain comfort and support for the refugees and for those who are suffering because of the war. Obtain serenity and peace for the whole world.
After praying the Regina Caeli the Holy Father said:
I cordially greet the residents of Castel Gandolfo, who always welcome me with great kindness, and all who have gathered here today for peaceful relaxation.
However, we cannot forget those who instead are experiencing moments of great suffering. I am thinking affectionately of the great number of refugees from Kosovo, who find themselves in a tragic situation.
I warmly thank those who are generously trying to help them. I express my particular appreciation of Italy's efforts in Albania, besides in its national territory, in a vast and generous aid operation called the "Rainbow Mission". I encourage public and private institutions, volunteer organizations and individual citizens to intensify their efforts to meet the needs of these brothers and sisters of ours who are so harshly tried.
The Immaculate will triumph. Happy Easter Monday!
  © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 21 March 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. In popular Christian tradition the month of March is dedicated to St Joseph, whose liturgical feast we celebrated on 19 March.
Joseph, husband of the Blessed Virgin Mary, is patron of the universal Church and enjoys special veneration among the People of God, as is also attested by the great number of Christians who bear his name. Ten years ago I dedicated an Apostolic Exhortation to his person and mission as Guardian of the Redeemer and of the Church, which today I would like to offer again for everyone's reflection during this last year of preparation for the Great Jubilee, dedicated precisely to God the Father. In Joseph, called to be the earthly father of the incarnate Word, the divine fatherhood is reflected in a most extraordinary way.
2. Joseph is the father of Jesus because he is really Mary's husband. She conceived virginally through God's action, but the child is also the son of Joseph, her lawful husband. This is why in the Gospel both are called the "parents" of Jesus (Lk 2:27, 41).
Through the exercise of his fatherhood, Joseph cooperates, in the fullness of time, in the great mystery of salvation (cf. Redemptoris Custos, n. 8). "His fatherhood is expressed concretely in his having made his life a service ... to the mystery of the Incarnation and to the redemptive mission connected with it; ... in having turned his human vocation to domestic love into a superhuman oblation of self, an oblation of his heart and all his abilities into love placed at the service of the Messiah growing up in his house" (ibid.). To this end, God shared his own fatherly love with Joseph, that love "from [which] every family in heaven and on earth is named" (Eph 3:15).
Like every child, Jesus learned about life and how to act from his parents. How could we not think, with deep wonder, that he must have developed the human aspect of his perfect obedience to the Father's will particularly by following the example of his father Joseph, "a just man" (cf. Mt 1:19)?
3. Today I would like to invoke the heavenly protection of St Joseph on all fathers and on their duties in family life. I also commend to him Bishops and priests, who are entrusted with the service of spiritual and pastoral fatherhood in the ecclesial Family. By concretely fulfilling their responsibilities, may each of them reflect God's provident and faithful love. May we obtain this through St Joseph and Blessed Mary, Queen of the family and Mother of the Church.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
On Wednesday, 24 March, the Day of Prayer and Fasting in Memory of Martyred Missionaries will be celebrated in Italy and in various countries of the world. The blood of these brothers and sisters is the seed of new Christians, the seed of reconciliation and hope. Last year 39 missionaries were killed: their witness enriches the treasury of grace which the Church will open to everyone in the Great Jubilee, and their memory will help us to live more intensely these days of preparation for Easter.
Next Thursday afternoon the young people of Rome will gather in the Vatican for a meeting of celebration and prayer in preparation for World Youth Day, which will be held throughout the Church on the following Sunday, Palm Sunday. I invite all the young men and women of Rome to take part in this event, which is already focused on the Year 2000, when, from 15 to 20 August, Rome will host the Great Jubilee of Young People.
***
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father appealed to the faithful to pray that the Lord would enlighten those responsible for the Kosovo region and its suffering communities:
The worsening situation in Kosovo prompts me to ask for your prayers, so that the Lord will enlighten all who are responsible for the future of that region.
Those communities have already endured a long "Way of the Cross" and are waiting for solutions which respect history and the law.
May Mary, Queen of Peace, instil in the hearts of those who have the destiny of nations in their hands the courage to take measures inspired by the true common good.
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 14 March 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Our Lenten journey to Easter continues, a journey of conversion guided by the Word of God, which illumines our steps in life. The joy of Christ's Resurrection is anticipated in a way in today's liturgy, which begins with the invitation to rejoice: "Rejoice and be glad, you who mourned; you will find contentment at her consoling breasts" (Entrance Antiphon).
It is the Resurrection that reveals the true value of the Cross, to which we are heading in this Lenten season. It is not a sign of death, but of life; not of frustration, but of hope; not of defeat, but of victory. Indeed - as an ancient liturgical hymn says - the Cross of Christ is our "only hope", for any other promise of salvation is deceptive, since it does not resolve the fundamental human problem: the problem of evil and death.
2. This is why Christians venerate the Cross and recognize it as the sign par excellence of love and hope. Young people too, oriented by nature to life, embrace the Cross of Jesus - like Francis of Assisi and all the saints - because they understand that the mystery of life would be a meaningless riddle without it.
In these months, the World Youth Day Cross is on pilgrimage in the Dioceses of Italy. Today it has arrived in Turin, where the young people of Piedmont and Val d'Aosta have gathered to welcome it in Piazza San Carlo. To them - who have joined us by television - I offer a special greeting and say: do not be afraid to welcome the Cross of Christ into your life! It gives full value and meaning to life's joys and sorrows, helping every person to make his own life a gift of love for God and neighbour.
The Cross teaches us to love everyone, even our enemies, to cooperate in Christ's redemptive work and in the fulfilment of God's kingdom.
3. At the foot of the Cross the Mother of Jesus stands silently in prayer. If we follow Christ in his Passion, Mary will always be at our side. Today I would like to entrust the Lenten journey of the whole Church to the Blessed Virgin. I would particularly like to entrust the efforts of young people to her, so that they will always be ready to welcome the Cross of Christ. The sign of our salvation and the banner of final victory, the Cross is the witness, dear young people, which you must receive from the generations that have gone before you, so that you can carry it into the third millennium as true apostles of the Gospel.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus on Sunday, 14 March, the Holy Father made an appeal for peace in Indonesia.
For several months the city of Ambon, capital of the Maluku islands of Indonesia, has been the scene of violent clashes which have upset the traditional harmony between Christians and Muslims. Serious ethnic and religious tensions have also occurred in other parts of Indonesia.
In view of these disturbing events, I make a pressing appeal to everyone - especially those who are fomenting the disorders - to forsake violence, the cause of countless sufferings, and to return to the paths of harmony. I would also like to express a word of comfort to the victims and my spiritual closeness to the entire Indonesian people, upon whom I invoke the Lord's blessing.
  © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 7 March 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. This Lenten Sunday is made joyful by the proclamation of several new blesseds. In their witness shines the paschal light of the Death and Resurrection of Christ, the light of love that conquers selfishness and makes human life a gift for God and for one's brothers and sisters. Their example encourages us to direct our steps resolutely towards the holiness to which we all are called by Baptism.
May Mary, ever present in the lives of these new blesseds, help us not to lose heart in the face of difficulties and to make us worshipers of the Father in spirit and truth.
2. I affectionately greet the Spanishspeaking Bishops and faithful and the Augustinian Recollects who have come for the beatification of the martyrs of Motril. I invite everyone not to forget the eloquent witness of their faith, since the blood of martyrs makes the Church fruitful and gives her vitality as she prepares with hope to confront the great challenges of evangelization in the third millennium.
I extend a fraternal greeting to the French-speaking pilgrims, particularly those who have come for the beatification of Fr Barré. Through education and spiritual direction, he proclaimed the Good News of salvation. Dear pilgrims, I hope you will follow his example and always nurture the same enthusiasm for the Gospel.
I cordially greet the German-speaking faithful, especially the pilgrims from the Diocese of Regensburg. Just as the Eucharist was the source of her strength, so the Rosary was Anna Schäffer's constant companion. May the example of this new blessed from your homeland give you the courage to grow more and more in contemplative prayer!
3. Now, as we turn our thoughts to Mary in the Angelus prayer, I invite everyone to quicken their steps on the path of the Gospel, strengthened by the examples of the saints and blesseds. They show that it is possible to follow Christ in every state of life and to draw from him the "living water" of the Holy Spirit, a source of inner renewal, patience, joy and peace.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted other pilgrim groups and spoke of International Women's Day:
"Women's Day" will be celebrated tomorrow, 8 March. I hope that this event will be an occasion for renewed reflection on the dignity and role of women in the family, in civil society and in the ecclesial community.
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 28 February 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The season of Lent, in addition to prayer, penance and fasting, invites us to intensify those acts of concrete charity which biblical language often describes by the term "almsgiving".
In this regard, Jesus warns us about the risk of wanting to be admired: charity is not genuine if it seeks human praise (cf. Mt 6:2-3). On the other hand, he urges his disciples: "Let them see your good works and give glory to your Father who is in heaven" (Mt 5:16). Our actions are "beautiful" when they reflect the light of God, so it is therefore right that the merit and praise for this light go to him.
2. In this last year of preparation for the Great Jubilee, in which we turn our gaze to God the Father, it is important to highlight "the greatest" (1 Cor 13:13) of Christian virtues, that is, charity, recalling the significant and lapidary words of the First Letter of John: "God is love" (4:8, 16). Charity, in its twofold aspect as love of God and neighbour, is the summing up of the believer's spiritual and moral life, and finds in God its source and summit (cf. Tertio millennio adveniente, n. 50).
I wrote in the Message for Lent that "the experience of the Father's love urges Christians to give of themselves to others, obeying a logic of service and solidarity in openness to their brothers and sisters". Then, recalling that "the arenas in which the Church through the centuries has borne witness to God's love in her word and action are vast", I added that "today we see immense areas in which the work of Christians must bring to bear the charity of God. New forms of poverty and the pressing questions which trouble many hearts await a concrete and appropriate response. Those who are lonely, those on the margins of society, the hungry, the victims of violence, those who have no hope must be able to experience, in the Church's loving care, the tenderness of the heavenly Father who, from the very beginning of the world, has kept every individual in mind in order to fill each one with his blessings" (n. 3).
3. Dear friends, let us pray to the Virgin Mary that during Lent she will help all disciples of Christ to put charity at the centre of their lives, and to question themselves about this in their daily examination of conscience. When they are tempted to turn in on themselves, the commitment to help others without expecting anything in return is a valuable way of experiencing God's love in one's own life.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
Tomorrow, 1 March, the convention on the ban and destruction of anti-personnel landmines takes effect.
This milestone marks a victory of the culture of life over the culture of death for the entire international community. The Holy See has supported it from the beginning, signing and ratifying the Ottawa document on 4 December 1997.
Unfortunately, there is still a long way to go before the world can be freed of these terrible, treacherous devices. I pray God to give everyone the courage of peace, so that the countries which have not yet signed this important instrument of international humanitarian law will do so without delay, and that the work of mine removal and the task of rehabilitating the injured will continue unabated.
May men and women walk together on the paths of life without fearing the threat of destruction and death!
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 21 February 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Last Wednesday we entered the liturgical season of Lent with the impressive rite of ashes. Today the Gospel again offers us the image of Christ who faces the tempter in the desert and, after 40 days and nights of fasting and prayer, vanquishes him by steadfast submission to God the Father's will. Thus Jesus shows the way to defeat sin: the way of penance. Not only that, but he himself, who is "the Just One", walks before us sinners as the Lamb who takes upon himself the sins of the world.
Jesus goes before us but he also calls us to follow him. 'Repent' is the first word of his preaching (cf. Mk 1:15). And his call resounds with special power and urgency this year, which is the last before the Great Jubilee and is meant for all to be the appropriate time to come to themselves and to decide to return to God, the merciful Father.
2. Therefore on this First Sunday of Lent, I make Paul the Apostle's appeal my own: "We beseech you on behalf of Christ, be reconciled to God" (2 Cor 5:20); do not let this favourable time pass in vain. We must free ourselves from the indifference and distractions of the world and listen to God's voice, which reechoes in the Church and, even before that, in each person's conscience.
"The examination of conscience is one of the most decisive moments of life. It places each individual before the truth of his own life. Thus he discovers the distance which separates his deeds from the ideal which he had set himself" (Bull Incarnationis mysterium, n. 11). By its nature, Lent, especially this year, allows us to enter into the authentic spirit of the Jubilee, helping each one to "recover what he could never attain by his own strength: God's friendship and grace, the supernatural life which alone can bring fulfilment to the deepest aspirations of the human heart" (n. 2).
3. Let us invoke the protection of Blessed Mary on this Lenten journey of the entire Church and of every individual believer. I entrust to the Blessed Virgin the spiritual exercises I will begin this evening with my collaborators in the Roman Curia, and for this reason I ask everyone for a special remembrance in their prayer.
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 14 February 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today we are celebrating the feast of Sts Cyril and Methodius, co-patrons of Europe along with St Benedict the Abbot. These two holy brothers, natives of Salonika, were the great evangelizers of the Slav world, a world made fruitful by the lifeblood of the Gospel, which has contributed a priceless heritage of spirituality and culture to the Church and to humanity.
In this context, how can we not think of the mission horizons that are unfolding in Europe on the threshold of the new millennium? The Holy Door of the Year 2000 will open onto a society which must be illumined by the light of Christ. The "Old Europe" received the gift of the Gospel, but now calls for a renewed Christian proclamation, which will help individuals and nations to combine freedom and truth, while providing spiritual and ethical foundations for the economic and political unification of the continent. May the intercession of these two remarkable evangelizers instil generous apostolic zeal in the Ecclesial Communities of the European continent, which are getting ready for a Second Special Assembly of the Synod of Bishops next autumn in preparation for the Great Jubilee.
2. Our thoughts now turn to this Wednesday, when the rite of ashes will begin the important season of Lent with its characteristic call to conversion and repentance.
This year, the last before 2000, Lent appears more than ever as the right time for a "return to the house of the Father", to a "journey of authentic conversion. This includes both a 'negative' aspect, that of liberation from sin, and a 'positive' aspect, that of choosing good" (Tertio millennio adveniente, n. 50). Is this not the most suitable context for rediscovering the most profound meaning of the sacrament of Penance? The message of conversion and reconciliation as an indispensable demand of Christian love is more urgent than ever in present-day society, in which the very foundations of an ethical vision of human life often seem lost.
3. Let us entrust our commitments and hopes to the Blessed Virgin, addressing her with the title of "Our Lady of Trust", as she is invoked at the Roman Major Seminary, which I had the opportunity to visit yesterday. May the Mother of God obtain for us the gift of trust, which brings hope and peace to the human heart.
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 7 February 1999
  1. Today in Italy we are celebrating Pro-Life Day, whose theme this year is: "Fatherhood and motherhood: gift and commitment". This is a clear invitation to reflect on the important mission of transmitting the gift of life, which the Lord has entrusted to parents. In fulfilling this task, they achieve the fullness of love and become privileged collaborators in God's creative work, as well as a reflection of his infinite and universal fatherhood.
Given the loftiness of this task, one naturally thinks of the frequent obstacles that arise after the children have been born: the lack of dignified work or adequate housing, or a safe, healthy living environment. And what can we say of those parents who, by yielding to a selfish and hedonistic view of life, voluntarily renounce the gift and joy of being mothers and fathers?
I hope that this last year of preparation for the Jubilee, which is dedicated to reflection on the fatherhood of God, will reawaken in all parents a joyful awareness of their great vocation to fatherhood and motherhood and spur public authorities to create an environment ever more favourable to the birth of new lives.
2. I have received the declaration against human cloning signed by many university teachers in Rome. In expressing my satisfaction with their strong condemnation of human cloning, I wish to encourage university teachers to continue developing a new culture of human rights and to defend the human person, from his conception, from anything that violates his dignity. This declaration is even more significant in the context of today's Pro-Life Day.
Let us pray to Mary, Queen of Families, so that all parents, in gratitude for the gift of motherhood and fatherhood, will be a sign of the heavenly Father's tenderness for every human life.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims and visitors from various countries in their own languages:
I cordially greet the French-speaking pilgrims who have gathered in St Peter's Square, particularly the cadets and instructors of the Military School of Saint-Cyr. I encourage them to become ever more faithful disciples of Christ. I wholeheartedly give them all my Apostolic Blessing.
I now extend a greeting to all the people and groups from Latin America and Spain, especially the faithful from the parishes of St James the Apostle in Albatera, Corpus Christi in Alicante and Sts Juliana and Semproniana in Barcelona. As I entrust you to the Virgin Mary's protection, I bless you all with affection.
I greet the Slovenian pilgrims, especially those from Ljubljana and the Ave Chamber Choir from the same city. Dear friends, may your pilgrimage to Rome increase your faith, strengthen your hope and set your charity on fire. May my Blessing accompany you in this effort.
I cordially greet the Croatian pilgrims, particularly those from Split. Dear friends, may the Blessed Virgin be a model of faith and Christian witness for you in your families, in society and in your parish communities. I bless you all. Praised be Jesus and Mary!
A cordial greeting to all who have come to St Peter's Square with Cardinal Ruini to show their support for life.
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
  JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 31 January 1999
  1. Today the Pope has a slight cold, so his words will be brief.
I returned three days ago from my pilgrimage to Mexico City and Saint Louis, in the United States, and I thank God for granting me this opportunity.
Let us entrust the destiny of the American peoples and their new evangelization to Our Lady of Guadalupe, patroness of Mexico and of the entire continent.
2. In St Peter's Square today many young members of Rome's Catholic Action have come at the end of their "Month of Peace", with their parents, teachers and many of their peers.
Dear friends, the theme of your project this year is "We are in time for peace". Yes, this is part of every Christian's mission: to remind everyone that we are always in time for peace.
The two doves we will release in a few moments are meant as a wish for peace for Rome and the whole world, which we entrust to the Blessed Virgin's intercession.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
I affectionately greet the Spanishspeaking pilgrims, especially the various parish groups from the Dioceses of Jerez de la Frontera, Almería, Cádiz and Seville. I invite them all joyfully to live the spirit of the Beatitudes, thereby building a world more in accord with the Gospel of Christ. I cordially bless you all.
Today we are celebrating World Leprosy Day, intended to renew the commitment to combatting and defeating this serious illness which still affects about 12 million people today. I send them a special Blessing, with the assurance of my constant prayer.
I also greet and encourage the Italian association, Friends of Raoul Follereau, and everyone throughout the world who is working generously to eliminate Hansen's disease and every form of social marginalization.
  © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
PASTORAL VISIT OF JOHN PAUL II TO AMERICA
ANGELUS
Hermanos Rodríguez Racetrack in Mexico City
Sunday, 24 January 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. At the Holy Mass we have just celebrated, I had the joy of sharing with all of you the same faith and the same love for Jesus Christ, as well as the same hope in his promises. I thank you with all my heart for coming here in such large numbers, and I again encourage you staunchly to live your Christian commitment as members of the Church which is approaching the third millennium.
2. The Post-Synodal Exhortation Ecclesia in America, presented yesterday, invites this beloved continent to renew its "yes" to Jesus Christ, accepting and responding with missionary generosity to his command to proclaim the Good News to all nations (cf. Mk 13:10). Once again I place under Mary's protective gaze the evangelizing fruits of the recent Synod for America, the apostolic zeal of its local Churches and this Pastoral Visit to the beloved Mexican nation.
3. The Week of Prayer for Christian Unity ends tomorrow; this year its theme is: "He will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself will be with them" (Rv 21:3). To achieve full communion among all believers in Christ is a constant goal of the Church, which asks the Father with renewed zeal in preparation for the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000 to make Christ's desire that all may be one a reality (cf. Jn 17:11). Full unity among Christians, towards which encouraging steps are being made, is a gift of the Holy Spirit which must be requested with perseverance.
I was saddened to hear of the barbaric murder of Sr Maria Aloysius of the Missionaries of Charity in Sierra Leone, and of the disturbing information about episodes of great violence againt the Church's work in the Republic of the Congo, Brazzaville. No motive can justify such savage cruelty towards people and institutions who have dedicated themselves for years to the good of all. Let us ask the Lord to inspire in everyone sentiments worthy of the human person created in the image of God.
4. May love for the Mother of God, so characteristic of American piety, help guide your own life according to the spirit and values of the Gospel, so that you may bear witness to them in the world. Our Lady of Guadalupe, intimately associated with the birth of the Church in America, was the radiant Star which illumined the proclamation of Christ the Saviour to the children of these peoples, helping the first missionaries in their evangelization. I ask her, who bore the "Good News of God" in her womb (Evangelii nuntiandi, n. 7), to help them be witnesses of Christ to others.
May Blessed Mary intercede for us and, with her motherly protection, accompany us in this inspiring commitment.
   
PASTORAL VISIT OF JOHN PAUL II TO AMERICA
ANGELUS
Hermanos Rodríguez Racetrack in Mexico City
Sunday, 24 January 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. At the Holy Mass we have just celebrated, I had the joy of sharing with all of you the same faith and the same love for Jesus Christ, as well as the same hope in his promises. I thank you with all my heart for coming here in such large numbers, and I again encourage you staunchly to live your Christian commitment as members of the Church which is approaching the third millennium.
2. The Post-Synodal Exhortation Ecclesia in America, presented yesterday, invites this beloved continent to renew its "yes" to Jesus Christ, accepting and responding with missionary generosity to his command to proclaim the Good News to all nations (cf. Mk 13:10). Once again I place under Mary's protective gaze the evangelizing fruits of the recent Synod for America, the apostolic zeal of its local Churches and this Pastoral Visit to the beloved Mexican nation.
3. The Week of Prayer for Christian Unity ends tomorrow; this year its theme is: "He will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself will be with them" (Rv 21:3). To achieve full communion among all believers in Christ is a constant goal of the Church, which asks the Father with renewed zeal in preparation for the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000 to make Christ's desire that all may be one a reality (cf. Jn 17:11). Full unity among Christians, towards which encouraging steps are being made, is a gift of the Holy Spirit which must be requested with perseverance.
I was saddened to hear of the barbaric murder of Sr Maria Aloysius of the Missionaries of Charity in Sierra Leone, and of the disturbing information about episodes of great violence againt the Church's work in the Republic of the Congo, Brazzaville. No motive can justify such savage cruelty towards people and institutions who have dedicated themselves for years to the good of all. Let us ask the Lord to inspire in everyone sentiments worthy of the human person created in the image of God.
4. May love for the Mother of God, so characteristic of American piety, help guide your own life according to the spirit and values of the Gospel, so that you may bear witness to them in the world. Our Lady of Guadalupe, intimately associated with the birth of the Church in America, was the radiant Star which illumined the proclamation of Christ the Saviour to the children of these peoples, helping the first missionaries in their evangelization. I ask her, who bore the "Good News of God" in her womb (Evangelii nuntiandi, n. 7), to help them be witnesses of Christ to others.
May Blessed Mary intercede for us and, with her motherly protection, accompany us in this inspiring commitment.
  © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 17 January 1999 
  1. The Day for Deepening and Developing the Jewish-Christian Religious Dialogue is being celebrated today in Italy. Our prayer is joined to that of our Jewish brothers and sisters to invoke God's blessing upon us all. This is an appropriate occasion for me to renew the hope I expressed in my Apostolic Letter Tertio millennio adveniente (n. 53), namely, that this third year of immediate preparation for the Jubilee, dedicated to God the Father, will be a great, joyous occasion for interreligious dialogue, especially between believers in the one true God.
2. This day for dialogue with Jews precedes the Week of Prayer for Christian Unity, which begins tomorrow and ends on 25 January, the feast of the Conversion of St Paul. This is already a well-established practice and is considered very important in the Ecclesial Communities: Christians of every denomination will share reflections and experiences on the theme developed by a joint team of Protestants, Orthodox and Catholics: "They will be his people and he will be "God with them"". The theme is taken from the Book of Revelation (21:3) and is a pressing invitation to hope, since God is communion and in Christ he gave birth to the Church, an icon of the Trinity and a sign and instrument of unity for the whole human race. This mystery of communion which is the Church will be fully revealed at the end of time, but is already a reality in history, as a light for all peoples. Every baptized person is called to contribute to it with constant prayer and fraternal charity.
3. On the last of these eight days, 25 January next, a solemn celebration will be held, as usual, at the Basilica of St Paul-Outside-the-Walls. Cardinal Edward Idris Cassidy will preside in my name, since I will be absent. I am going to Mexico City and to Saint Louis, in the United States, from 22 to 28 January, to give the faithful of the American continent the Post-Synodal Exhortation containing the directives and guidelines that resulted from the recent Special Assembly for America of the Synod of Bishops. I ask everyone to accompany me in prayer during this important apostolic journey, which gives me the welcome opportunity to return as a pilgrim to Our Lady of Guadalupe, patroness of Mexico and of all America, where I went 20 years ago during the first apostolic pilgrimage of my Pontificate.
To her intercession I will entrust the new evangelization of America, where most of the world's Catholics and Christians live. May the Mother of the Church obtain for all believers in Christ a strengthening of their bonds of unity and solidarity, so that their Gospel witness will be credible and effective everywhere.
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
  JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Feast of the Baptism of the Lord
Sunday, 10 January 1999
  1. On this Sunday we are celebrating the feast of the Baptism of the Lord. The Gospel passage that the liturgy offers for our reflection speaks of Jesus, who, hidden in the crowd, goes into the river Jordan to be baptized by John. As he comes out of the water, the heavens are opened, the Spirit of God appears in the form of a dove and a voice resounds from on The faithful came in large numbers despite the rain high: "This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased" (Mt 3:17).
In this scene it is God himself who, in a certain way, is revealed in his Trinitarian mystery: the Father, principle and source of life and holiness; the Son, who came into the world to free it from sin and death; and the Holy Spirit, who sustains the work of Redemption with his power.
2. In the context of this final year of preparation for the Great Jubilee, the year dedicated to the Father, today's feast takes on a special value. The icon of Jesus' Baptism calls to our mind the merciful face of the heavenly Father, who, as the Gospel says, "so loved the world that he gave his only Son, that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life" (Jn 3:16).
Thus we are invited to reflect on the Father's love for us, who have been raised in Baptism to the dignity of his adoptive children. The awareness of such a lofty dignity must reawaken our commitment to conduct ourselves appropriately.
3. This morning, in the evocative setting of the Sistine Chapel, I conferred the first sacrament of Christian initiation on a number of children. Along with their parents and godparents, we give thanks to the Lord for the gift of life and sanctifying grace which has made these babies adopted children of God. Let us pray for all the baptized, that they will respond with renewed fidelity to the Lord's call and always live in his love.
We entrust these wishes to Our Lady so that, as the Mother of Divine Grace, she will help all Christians to be conscious of the meaning and importance of their own Baptism and to be faithful to it in everyday life.
May you all have a pleasant Sunday and a good week. Praised be Jesus Christ!
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Solemnity of the Epiphany of the Lord
Wednesday, 6 January 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The Eucharistic celebration during which I consecrated nine Bishop ended a short while ago in St Peter's Basilica. This inspiring rite has been held for several years now on the day of Epiphany, which recalls the manifestation of Christ to all nations, represented by the Magi who came to Bethlehem from the East.
Christ is the light of the world who illumines every individual and all peoples: this is the message of today's solemnity, a message which is entrusted first of all to Bishops, who from generation to generation have received the mandate given by the risen Christ to his Apostles: "Go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit" (Mt 28:19).
2. This missionary mandate is for all Christ's disciples. As the international community prepares to cross the threshold of the third millennium and looks with concern at the shadows still marking its path, the Church "ardently desires that the light of Christ will illumine all men and women" (Lumen gentium, n. 1), and for this reason she increases her efforts to proclaim the Gospel to every creature (cf. ibid.).
Humanity needs Christ: his Word of salvation, his consoling presence and his love that makes all things new. The world expects a brave and faithful witness from Christians.
Let us pray that every believer will have a growing missionary sense and there will be a greater number of those who in every corner of the world devote their energies to the Gospel cause. I am thinking in particular of the first lands to be evangelized and of all who are not afraid to face the risks and dangers of bringing them the Word of God; I am also thinking of those who, despite great physical and moral suffering, generously offer their lives to the Lord to contribute to his mysterious plan of salvation.
3. Dear brothers and sisters, as we joyfully thank the heavenly Father for the gift of these new Bishops, may our prayerful remembrance extend to the whole ecclesial community, sent by Jesus to evangelize all nations: may the light of the Redeemer always shine brightly upon its face.
We ask this through the intercession of Blessed Mary, Mother of the Church and Queen of Apostles. May she, who showed the Child Jesus to the Magi in Bethlehem, help us to proclaim and bear witness to the Good News of God's merciful love to the people of our time.
After reciting the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the many pilgrims in St Peter's Square, particularly those participating in "Viva la Befana", a folkloric pageant commemorating Epiphany and the "Befana", a good witch who brings treats to Italian children on this day.
I extend a warm welcome to the pilgrims present, with a special thought for all the relatives, friends and acquaintances who have come for the ordination of the new Bishops.
I also greet those who have organized and are performing in the historical-folkloric pageant "Viva la Befana", whose motifs this year have been inspired by the regions of Valle del Tevere and Parco di Vejo, particularly by the town of Sacrofano. May these popular traditions always keep alive the human and religious values on which our communities are based.
Happy New Year and "buona Befana"!
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana 
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 3 January 1999
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. At the beginning of the new year, a feeling of hope spontaneously arises in hearts and seeks to be expressed in concrete acts of peace and reconciliation. I stated this widespread aspiration in the Message I published for the World Day of Peace. It is focused on the conviction that the secret of true peace lies in respect for human rights. When the rights of the person are ignored or even scorned, the seeds of instability, rebellion and violence are inevitably sown.
It is urgently necessary to regain an awareness of the dignity of every human person, created in the image and likeness of God (cf. Gn 1:26-28), to find in that dignity the firm foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world.
2. Unfortunately, at the very beginning of the new year we still see distressful situations, and from various parts of the world cries of misery continue to be raised because of wars and oppression. My thoughts at this time turn to Angola, where the fratricidal conflict has flared up again, to the Republic of the Congo whose peoples, far from the world's attention, have been suffering for some time the consequences of harsh armed conflicts, and to Sierra Leone, the theatre of unspeakable violence which forces people to flee their own homes into the unknown.
Echoing the anguished calls I receive from so many parts of the world, I call on political and military leaders, urging them to make every possible effort to foster a just and lasting peace.
The tragedy of Kosovo, where hostilities broke out on Christmas Eve, is ever present in my heart.
3. I entrust these situations of suffering to the intercession of the One whom we invoked on the first day of the year as Mother of the Word made man to restore the unity of the human family, divided by sin.
May the Blessed Virgin inspire in the hearts of the men and women of our time a stronger desire for understanding and harmony, so that from the commitment of all a more just and fraternal world may be born in the new millennium that lies before us.
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Solemnity of Mary, Mother of God
World Day of Peace
Friday, 1 January 1999
  1. Today's liturgy offers us once again the ancient and inspiring biblical blessing: "The Lord bless you and keep you. The Lord make his face to shine upon you, and be gracious to you. The Lord lift up his countenance upon you, and give you peace" (Nm 6:24-26).
With these words I offer each of you my cordial wishes for a New Year filled with every blessing and consolation.
We are starting 1999 with our gaze fixed on the Virgin Mother of God, who accepted the Father's hidden designs with humble abandonment. From her generous "yes" sprang the true light that illumines everyone (cf. Jn 1:9). Through her trusting co-operation, the peace that is Christ himself was given to all mankind.
2. Quite appropriately we are celebrating World Day of Peace today, as we do every year. In the Message which I addressed for this occasion to the Heads of State, representatives of the nations and people of good will, and whose theme is "Respect for human rights: the secret of true peace", I wished to refer to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 10 December 1948. I recalled the reciprocal and indispensable connection that exists between respect for human rights and peace: "Complete observance of human rights is the surest road to establishing solid relations between States. The culture of human rights cannot fail to be a culture of peace" (n. 12; L'Osservatore Romano English edition, 23/30 December 1998, p. 11).
The desire for peace which moved the United Nations Assembly 50 years ago to proclaim human rights continues today to inspire the efforts of all people of good will who want to build a world of ever greater justice and solidarity.
3. We pray that, despite the difficulties and obstacles which sometimes make the path of peace arduous and tiring, hearts will never lack the inner yearning which is expressed in concrete acts of reconciliation and respect for every human being.
We pray especially that the representatives of States will show generous willingness and diligent effort in accepting and fulfilling humanity's fertile and irrepressible desire for understanding and peace. Let us entrust our wishes to the heavenly Mother of the "King of Peace".
Let us place the new year in her hands, that it may be a time of authentic progress and of serene and peaceful coexistence for the whole world.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the faithful in various languages. To the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors he said:
I greet the English-speaking visitors who have joined us for this Angelus prayer on the Solemnity of Mary, Mother of God. Through her intercession, may the joy and peace of the Christ Child remain with you and your families throughout the New Year.
At the end the Pope added:
Finally, I greet Castel Gandolfo, which we can see today, everyone present here and all who live in Italy, Poland and throughout the world. Best wishes for a happy New Year! We can see and hear Regnum Christi. Regnum Christi is here! Praised be Jesus Christ!
    © Copyright 1999 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 31 December 2000
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. In an atmosphere of Christmas joy, today we are celebrating the Feast of the Holy Family. This year it falls on 31 December, the last day of the year. Is it not providential that the Year 2000, the year that seals a millennium, should end in the sign of the family?
We turn our gaze from the crib to the humble dwelling of Nazareth. Having become our brother, Jesus wanted to experience family life. Thus he became part of the first, fundamental cell of society, in this way giving perennially valid recognition to the most common of human institutions.
For us believers, the family, a reflection of Trinitarian communion, finds its model in the family of Nazareth, where the human history of the Redeemer and his parents unfolded. We think of the difficulties Mary and Joseph had to face at Jesus' birth and then during their exile in Egypt to escape Herod's persecution. Nazareth has also become the symbol of that "normality" of daily life which marks every family's existence.
2. Looking today at that Holy House, our thoughts turn to the many families of our time who are in difficult situations. Some of them suffer from extreme poverty; others are forced to seek in foreign countries what they unfortunately lack in their homeland; still others find within their own families serious problems caused by the rapid cultural and social changes which at times overwhelm them. And what can be said of the many attacks on the family institution itself? All this shows how urgent it is to rediscover the value of the family and to help it in every way to be, as God wanted it, the vital environment where every child who comes into the world is welcomed with tenderness and gratitude from the moment of his conception; a place marked by a serene atmosphere that encourages the harmonious human and spiritual development of all its members.
May the Holy Family, whom we venerate today, obtain this gift for every family and help them to be a little "domestic church", a school of human and religious virtues.
3. Today, 31 December, another year of our life and history is coming to an end. A year which is certainly unique, because it is the Great Jubilee year, in which we have seen signs of good will in so many men and women, as well as a genuine desire for reconciliation with God and neighbour.
As this year draws to a close, let us invoke the Lord's forgiveness for the shortcomings that have marked our personal and community life. Only in this way can our thanksgiving for the many benefits we have received be true and sincere. And there are truly many reasons why we feel that we must thank the Lord at the end of this Year 2000. Let us do so, through Mary, with the Angelus prayer.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims and faithful.
I affectionately greet the pilgrims here today. I would especially like to mention the faithful from Giulianello and Cori in the Province of Latina. Dear friends, you have organized your traditional procession of Wise Men on horseback with flag-bearers; I gladly bless your journey, which will take you to the revered image of the Child Jesus at Giulianello di Cori.
My most cordial wishes for peace and goodness to everyone.
© Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Tuesday, 26 December 2000
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. In the light of holy Christmas, today the liturgy presents St Stephen's heroic example for our contemplation. With his martyrdom he honours the coming into the world of the King of kings, making him a gift of his own life. Thus he shows us how to live the mystery of Holy Christmas.
To give Jesus a fitting welcome and to prolong the joy of the holy night, one must make one's own the teaching of the Gospel, even at the cost of one's life. And if not everyone is called, like Stephen, to shed his blood for Christ, nonetheless every Christian is asked to live his faith consistently in every circumstance.
2. Following the Gospel is certainly an arduous and demanding journey, but the gift which the Lord offers to men and women of good will comforts us. Indeed, in Bethlehem the angels proclaim to the shepherds:  "on earth peace among men with whom he is pleased!" (Lk 2: 14).
Peace, so longed and hoped for and which alone can restore serenity to every person's conscience and heart, is assured to all who, even in the trials of life, receive God's word and are committed to observing it with perseverance to the very end (cf. Mt 10: 22). Christ himself, St Paul will say, is our peace.
3. As I cordially hope you will spend these Christmas celebrations peacefully, I invoke St Stepen's protection upon each one. May he, the Protomartyr, sustain us on our daily journey, which we hope at last to crown with eternal Christmas in the festive and joyful setting of the saints in heaven.
After praying the Angelus the Holy Father said:
This morning too, in looking out of the window I saw and see in this square a multitude of people who, making the most of the last days of the Jubilee, are patiently waiting to enter the Basilica through the Holy Door.
This spectacle moves me and reminds me of the People of God on their way towards the promised land. Christ is the true Door that leads us, his people, into the "promised land of heaven".
To everyone I repeat my good wishes for a serene continuation of the Christmas festivities.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday 24 December 2000
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today the Fourth Sunday of Advent, which this year occurs on Christmas Eve itself, urges us to create an atmosphere of deep recollection and prayer, in order to prepare ourselves fittingly for the Lord's imminent coming.
We are living in anxious and joyful expectation of the Redeemer's birth. On streets and in homes everything speaks of Christmas. Lights, decorations and presents create an unmistakable Christmas atmosphere. However, the external preparations, though necessary, must not detract attention from the central and extraordinary event being commemorated, that is, the birth of Jesus, the Father's precious gift to humanity.
2. The liturgy and especially the Gospel narrative help us to live this Christmas Eve better.
Let us pause to contemplate the Grotto of Bethlehem. The King of the universe did not even have that indispensable minimum which every family prepares in advance for a child's birth and Mary and Joseph, for whom there was no room at the inn, were obliged to seek shelter in a humble stable.
The manger would be the first cradle of the newborn Child (cf. Lk 2: 7). Therefore God became one of us in a setting of extreme poverty. In this way was born the Only Son of the Father, the One the people had awaited, the Holy Door of salvation that gives us access to the fullness of immortal life.
Mary, the Virgin Mother, who knew how to accept the Word of God with total obedience, is in the grotto beside Jesus. Joseph is there, her chaste husband, obedient to the Almighty's mysterious plans, even when events seemed incomprehensible and hard to accept. This scene, in its simplicity, is a silent invitation to understand the true value of the Christmas mystery, a mystery of humility and love, of joy and of attention to the poor.
While people in their homes are putting the finishing touches to their cribs and are preparing to spend Christmas in serene family harmony, may they not overlook an act of solidarity for those who will unfortunately spend these days in loneliness and suffering. The joy of this feast will be all the greater the more we are able to share it, not only with our family and friends, but also with all those who expect a concrete remembrance from us.
Let us ask the Blessed Virgin to help us celebrate the birth of her divine Son like this, as we recite the prayer of the Angelus together.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said: 
I extend my best wishes for Christmas to everyone present.
This evening I will have the joy of celebrating in St Peter's Square the solemn midnight Mass to which I invite all those who are able to take part.
Tomorrow morning at 10.30, also in this square, holy Mass will be celebrated by the Cardinal Secretary of State, at the end of which I will impart from the parvis the traditional Urbi et Orbi Message of good wishes.
Once again, Happy Christmas to you all!
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
JUBILEE OF THE ENTERTAINMENT WORLD
ANGELUS
Sunday, 17 December 2000
    1. As we prepare to close this solemn celebration, I again greet you, dear brothers and sisters, who represent the vast, multifaceted world of entertainment.
I extend a special greeting to those of you who are itinerants, because you work in circuses, amusement parks or on the streets. Your travel today has become a pilgrimage and reminds everyone that the Church is a people always on the move, with no fixed dwelling in this world. Be a Christian community yourselves; everywhere you go, bring not only healthy entertainment, but also the values of faith, the family and solidarity. May the great Cross icon here before us, which in 2001 will accompany the Jubilee mission in the circuses and amusement parks of Europe and America, enlighten and comfort you in the inevitable moments of difficulty.
I now greet the many musical bands which have come to gladden this celebration. Their presence is particularly in tune with the spirit of this Sunday, which the liturgy calls Gaudete Sunday, that is, the Sunday of joy. Let us thank them for the contribution they have made to today's celebration.
Lastly, I thank the "Madonnari" of Italy for the artistic panels depicting the Annunciation and the Nativity, which they have donated to decorate several new churches.
2. With great joy I also greet you, dear boys and girls, who have come, as you do every year, to have the figurines of the Baby Jesus blessed before you put them in your cribs at home. I hope that as they gather around this wonderful sign of God's tenderness, every family will find joy and peace, and will experience in simplicity the true spirit of the Christmas holidays.
3. Dear French-speaking pilgrims, I cordially greet you, especially those who have come for the Jubilee of the Entertainment World. Christ asks you to be messengers of joy and peace by unveiling to human eyes the ineffable mystery of God. I grant you all my Apostolic Blessing.
I extend a warm greeting to all of you taking part in the Jubilee of the world of entertainment, as well as to your colleagues in all parts of the world involved in the varied traditional and new forms of the performing arts. May the Jubilee bring you the inner joy which will make your professional work at once more personally satisfying, and more helpful and uplifting in its influence on society. God bless you and keep you in his love!
I greet the German-speaking performers and artists. I am pleased that you came to Rome to pass through the Holy Door. It opens an area that goes far beyond theatres and squares:  the area of grace and salvation. Portray the true, the good and the beautiful in your work. May God's blessing go with you.
I affectionately greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims from the entertainment world. May this Jubilee celebration encourage you to continue transmitting to the world messages of life, love, hope, solidarity and peace. In your work may you always be a leaven and sign of the joy that comes from knowing for certain that the Lord is among us and saves us.
I greet all the Portuguese-speaking participants in this Jubilee of the Entertainment World, congratulating you on the joy that you felt in meeting Jesus. You have been the joy of human beings; now you are also God's joy. Bring this new joy to the whole world!
4. With the Angelus prayer we now turn to Mary Most Holy, whom we venerate as the "cause of our joy", so that every human being can receive the joy of Christmas, now close at hand.
© Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
JUBILEE OF CATECHISTS AND RELIGION TEACHERS
ANGELUS
Sunday, 10 December 2000
  1. In a few days we will recall the approval given 50 years ago to the Statute of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. It is an important date for many people who, forced to flee their own countries because of war and persecution, have found in this programme protection and aid on every continent.
It is also important for the men and women who have unselfishly offered their time, skill and generous willingness even over and above their work duties, to bring help to these refugees in often serious and dangerous situations. They should be thanked by the international community, which must be committed to guarding their safety and supporting their humanitarian work, with the necessary economic aid as well. In international solidarity and in political dialogue, it is possible to find solutions so that the sheltering of refugees is not too burdensome in some countries and their basic rights and freedoms are defended by public institutions and structures.
2. Before concluding this solemn celebration, I would like to offer a word of gratitude and encouragement to all the catechists and religion teachers here and to those who are joined to us in spirit. Thank you, dear friends, for the missionary fervour and zeal with which you dedicate yourselves to the work of catechesis and religious education.
Precisely to encourage you to continue your activity with the missionary spirit that marks this Jubilee day, in a few moments I will present the Catechism of the Catholic Church to five catechist couples, representing all the continents. With this act I would like to stress that, in the variety of their languages and cultures, catechists are called to proclaim the same Truth throughout the world:  Christ, the only Saviour of the world, yesterday, today and for ever.
3. Dear French-speaking catechists, I cordially greet you as you celebrate the Jubilee. The Church is counting on you particularly to make Christ known to young people, to make him loved by them and to help them to live in intimacy with him. May you draw from this Jubilee the strength and daring to transmit tirelessly and patiently the message of salvation! I grant my Apostolic Blessing to all!
I warmly greet the English-speaking participants in this Jubilee of Catechists and Religion Teachers. Yours is the great task and privilege in the Church of helping to pass on the faith in its saving fullness. By symbolically placing in your hands the Catechism of the Catholic Church, I wish to invite all involved in teaching the faith, especially parents and catechists, to make the Catechism a familiar and well-used resource in the home, parish and school. May Mary, Seat of Wisdom, sustain you in your generous commitment. God bless you and your families!
I greet the catechists and religion teachers from German-speaking countries. The subject entrusted to you cannot be taught in words alone. The best lesson you can give your pupils is the witness of your life. Whoever teaches the faith must also practise it. For this demanding mission I give you God's abundant blessing.
I welcome the Spanish-speaking catechists who are participating in this Jubilee. I ask you to become teachers of spirituality and to accompany the whole life of the Christian faithful with your personal witness. Pass on the authentic wisdom of the Gospel. May Jesus Christ always be the centre of your catechesis.
My cordial greeting to all the catechists and religion teachers who have come from Portuguese-speaking countries, to whom I leave the Catechism of the Catholic Church as a Jubilee remembrance, repeating to each of them the order given by God to the prophet Ezekiel:  "Eat this scroll and go speak to your brethren"! My Blessing to you and your pupils.
I cordially greet the catechists from Poland - the priests, women religious and lay teachers. The Church has entrusted you with the important task of handing on Christ's teaching and of bearing witness to his saving love. May this Jubilee meeting be a time of special openness for you to the light and power of the Holy Spirit, so that, strengthened by his grace, you can fruitfully carry out your apostolic service in the new millennium. God bless you and all catechists in Poland!
4. As we recite the Angelus prayer together, let us once again entrust the work of evangelizing the whole world to the Mother of the Church.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
SOLEMNITY OF THE IMMACULATE CONCEPTION
ANGELUS
Friday, 8 December 2000

  1. Today we are celebrating the Solemnity of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary, a feast very dear to the Christian people. It fits in well with the Advent season and radiates the purest light on our spiritual journey to Christmas.
Today we contemplate the humble girl of Nazareth who, by an extraordinary and ineffable privilege, was preserved from the contagion of original sin and from every fault, so that she could be a worthy dwelling-place for the Incarnate Word. In Mary, the New Eve, Mother of the New Adam, the Father's original, wondrous plan of love was re-established in an even more wondrous way. Therefore the Church gratefully acclaims:  "Through you, immaculate Virgin, the life we had lost was returned to us. You received a child from heaven, and brought forth to the world a Saviour" (Liturgy of the Hours, Memorial of the Blessed Virgin Mary on Saturday, Benedictus Antiphon).
2. Today's liturgy once again presents the Gospel account of the Annunciation. In response to the Angel, the Virgin proclaims:  "Behold I am the handmaid of the Lord; let it be to me according to your word" (Lk 1: 38). Mary expresses her total assent of mind and heart to God's hidden will and prepares herself to receive the Son of God, first in faith and then in her virginal womb.
"Behold!". Her prompt compliance with the divine will is a model for all of us believers, so that in great events, as well as in ordinary affairs, we will entrust ourselves entirely to the Lord.
By the witness of her life, Mary encourages us to believe in the fulfilment of God's promises. She calls us back to the spirit of humility, the right interior attitude of the creature towards the Creator; she urges us to put our sure hope in Christ, who fulfils the divine plan, even when events seem obscure and are difficult to accept. As a shining Star, Mary guides our steps to the Lord who comes.
3. Dear brothers and sisters! Let us turn our eyes to the Immaculate, all Holy and all Fair. May Mary, our Advocate, Mother of the "King of Peace", who crushes the serpent's head, help us, the men and women of the third millennium, to resist the seductions of evil; may she rekindle faith, hope and charity in our hearts, so that, faithful to our call and ready to make any sacrifice, we may be fearless witnesses to Jesus Christ, the Holy Door of eternal salvation.
After leading the Angelus and giving his Blessing, the Holy Father greeted some of the groups in St Peter's Square.
I cordially greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims, especially the group from "The Work of the Church". The celebration of the feast of the Immaculate Conception, so deep-rooted in Spain and Latin America, invites us to look constantly to Mary and to imitate her. To her, whom we joyfully contemplate today as "conceived without sin", I entrust your hopes and plans, as well as your homes and families.
My thoughts now turn with affection to the Italian-speaking pilgrims. In particular, I greet the members of the Pontifical Academy of the Immaculate, all of whom are here today - seminarians, families and the Ordo Virginum - along with their President, dear Cardinal Andrzej Maria Deskur. I thank you for your presence and for your collaboration on the success of today's feast. I know that this is the day when you renew your consecration to Mary, and for this I assure you of a special remembrance in my prayer.
I would now like to greet the members of Italian Catholic Action, who today are celebrating "Membership Day" in their parish communities. I wish the entire association fruitful formative and apostolic activity, and I express my appreciation of their renewed commitment to spreading knowledge of the Second Vatican Council.
I also greet the volunteers of the Organization for Religious Assistance to the Sick (O.A.R.I.), who are celebrating their Jubilee today, as well as the children from several parishes and Catholic schools in the Milan area who have come to make their "promise" to follow Jesus as the ideal of their life.
With you, dear Romans, and with you, pilgrims, I make an appointment for this afternoon in Piazza di Spagna, as I hope that you will enjoy a peaceful day in the light of Our Immaculate Lady.
© Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
JUBILEE OF THE DISABLED
ANGELUS
Sunday, 3 December 2000
    1. At the end of this moving celebration, dear disabled brothers and sisters, I would like to look upon you in a more genuine light as those who are differently abled.
In this perspective, I am pleased to thank all of you who wanted to attend, and I greet those who were unable to join us physically but are following this event in full communion thanks to radio and television. Today's Jubilee celebration is one of the most significant and dearest to me. With great affection I think of your families, the Ecclesial Communities to which you belong and the various volunteer organizations that walk at your side.
I would especially like to encourage the various associations in which an open-mindedness to social integration is growing and spreading. It increases a style of community in which people are recognized on the basis of their equal dignity, without any pietism or social dependency. Many steps have been taken in this direction. Today's celebration, in fact, is meant to reaffirm that a society of solidarity is possible, if we learn to recognize and meet others first and foremost as persons.
2. I cordially greet you, dear French-speaking disabled friends, and those accompanying you. May this pilgrimage help you to feel more and more one with the Church, in which you have your own specific place and mission! I grant you all an affectionate Apostolic Blessing!
I extend a warm greeting to the English-speaking pilgrims who are sharing the joy of this Jubilee of the Disabled. You have passed through the Holy Door in the company of the crucified Lord who - in St Luke's words - is "good news to the poor, liberty to captives and new sight to the blind" (4: 18). From the cross of your suffering, learn to draw the serenity of spirit which so many people yearn for today. And may Mary, Mother of the Redeemer, guard you always with her love.
With great joy I also greet you, dear brothers and sisters from German-speaking countries. May your Holy Year pilgrimage to Rome strengthen your faith, so that you can bear your suffering and infirmities with confidence. My special thanks to your companions and care-givers. I gladly give you all my Apostolic Blessing.
I cordially greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims attending this Jubilee of the Disabled. As I invite you to overcome the social barriers of separation and indifference, and to spread an attitude of integration and advancement, I assure you that the Church welcomes you, loves you and needs you. Work with her in proclaiming the Love of God.
With great affection I greet all the disabled people who have come from Portuguese-speaking countries: you are brothers and sisters of the suffering Christ, his living and transparent image; with him you will save the world, if you love. The Church is at your side; I assure everyone of my prayer and Blessing, which I extend to your relatives and to all who assist you.
I greet all the disabled people from Poland and other countries of the world, as well as their relatives, friends and care-givers. I cordially welcome each and every one of you. You have come to the tombs of the Apostles Peter and Paul to celebrate the Great Jubilee of the Redemption with an international community. Your presence expresses the truth that, on the ways of faith, hope and love, the power of the Holy Spirit means more than any human limitation or weakness. May this Jubilee meeting be a time of grace and strength for you all in the task of bearing witness in the world to human dignity, whose source is not the outward condition of the body but the primordial likeness to the Creator. God bless you!
3. I cordially greet the people outside the basilica and in St Peter's Square who have joined our celebration. Now we turn to the Blessed Virgin, Mother of Hope, to ask her to give us an ever deeper sense of the mysterious value of your life and the mission which God assigns you in the Church.
© Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
JUBILEE OF THE ARMED FORCES AND THE POLICE
ANGELUS
Sunday, 19 November 2000
  At the end of this Jubilee celebration, dear Members of the Armed Forces and the Police, my thoughts turn in particular to your relatives.
In the Book of the Acts of the Apostles, an account is given of St Peter's visit to the centurion Cornelius, "a devout man who feared God with all his household" (Acts 10: 2). He accepted the proclamation of Christ's Gospel by Peter, to whom he gave hospitality for several days, and received Baptism together with his family members. Thus the first pagans to be baptized by Peter were members of a soldier's family. It is significant to remember this today, in the context of your Jubilee.
It is not easy to be a soldier's family, because even the hardships of his mission must be shared. Yet the family is the principal support of each one of you, committed to defending peace and life. One defends what one loves and where does one learn to love peace and life if not in the family? Therefore, dear families, feel fully involved in this mission and collaborate in safeguarding justice and peace.
2. On this day when you have come to make a Jubilee act with your families, I cordially greet you all, members of the armed forces and of the police of Belgium, Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Croatia, France, Luxembourg, Romania, Slovenia, Canada, the Netherlands and Slovakia. May this important time be an opportunity for you to strengthen your mission in order to continue the important service you carry out, attentive to the needs of all your compatriots, to build an ever more peaceful and fraternal society! I hail your sense of responsibility, efforts and commitments, and pray with you for all who died or were injured while carrying out their activities. With my Apostolic Blessing!
I greet the English-speaking participants in this Jubilee celebration for Members of the Armed Forces and Police, especially those from Australia, Canada, Great Britain, Ireland, Korea, Malawi, the Philippines and the United States of America. A particular greeting also goes to the representatives of the peace-keeping force in the Balkans, made up of military personnel from 38 countries.
The work and sacrifice of all of you help to ensure the peace and security of individuals and societies. I pray that you yourselves will always be kept safe as you fulfil your professional duties, and that the divine gifts of wisdom and strength will ever accompany you in the service of your own countries and of your fellow men and women. Upon you and your families, I invoke the grace and peace of our Lord Jesus Christ.
I extend a warm greeting to the German-speaking soldiers and police. Welcome to the Eternal City, soldiers and police from Germany, Austria, Switzerland, the Czech Republic, Slovenia and Hungary. Your work is in the front line at the service of security and peace. Carry out this duty with high responsibility and sensitivity! May God's Blessing accompany you on the way of peace.
I now extend a greeting to the soldiers and police forces of Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, El Salvador, Paraguay, Peru, Spain, Bolivia, Guatemala, the Dominican Republic, Venezuela, Costa Rica, Mexico and Panama. I encourage you to collaborate generously in the honourable task of establishing peace, cooperation and coexistence among all peoples. May God bless you in your family and professional life so that you may give proof of adherence to Christ and his Church. Thank you very much.
I greet the soldiers and members of the forces of public security from Brazil, Mozambique and Portugal, imploring divine wisdom on your noble missions so that, despite the risk, you will be able to transmit peace and confidence to your close relatives and fellow citizens.
I cordially greet the representatives of the Polish army and police force present here. This Jubilee meeting with the soldiers of the whole world is an event that shows in a particular way how the army does not necessarily have to be the protagonist of the tragic events of war but can and must be the protector and messenger of peace. I pray that the difficult service of the army and the police for the protection of the security of people and nations may always be distinguished by deep sensitivity to suffering and to the needs of the weakest, and that it may be rewarded by the gratitude of societies and by God's blessing.
3. At this time of profound communion, enriched with the Jubilee grace, I would like to raise my prayer to the Lord for your many colleagues who have died in these years during various missions of peace and in the defence of law and order. May their sacrifice not have been in vain! May their hidden and silent witness be an encouragement to everyone not to be resigned to injustice, but to conquer evil with good! May God welcome them into his kingdom of peace and grant serenity and comfort to their families and to all their loved ones.
Let us entrust to the motherly intercession of Mary Most Holy our intense and prayerful invocation for the living and the dead.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
JUBILEE OF THE APOSTOLATE OF THE LAITY
ANGELUS
Sunday, 26 November 2000
  Dear Lay Faithful!
1. Before concluding this Jubilee celebration, I wanted to entrust the Documents of the Second Vatican Council to you again in the person of some of your representatives. My thoughts turn at this moment to that historic and providential ecclesial event. Some of the documents, including the Decree on the Apostolate of the Laity Apostolicam actuositatem, were approved at this time 35 years ago. The Pastoral Constitution on the Church in the Modern World Gaudium et spes was approved along with other texts on 7 December. The next day the Council assembly definitively promulgated all its documents.
As before, today too I have symbolically wished to entrust again the vast patrimony of the Council especially to you, dear lay faithful, apostles of the third millennium, as I recall that it was precisely to lay people - government leaders, intellectuals and scientists, artists, women, workers, young people, the poor and the sick - that the Council gave its final message meant for all humanity.
At this epochal turning-point, the Second Vatican Council's teaching seems more timely than ever:  indeed, today's conditions require that your apostolic commitment as lay people should be more intense and extensive. Study the Council, deepen your understanding of it, assimilate its spirit and guidelines:  there you will find the light and strength to bear witness to the Gospel in every area of human life.
2. I cordially greet you French-speaking pilgrims who have come for the Congress of the Apostolate of the Laity. A few days before the anniversary of the Council's close, you are asked to reread its documents in order to strengthen your vocation, to be committed to the apostolate as presented by the Council Fathers, to be witnesses to the Good News in the world and to take an ever more active part in the Church's mission. The world needs your personal, marital, family, professional and ecclesial witness. I impart my Apostolic Blessing to you all!
During this Jubilee of the Laity I have wished to place once again in the hands and hearts of the lay people of the world the documents of the Second Vatican Council. The Council, centred on Christ and his Church and open to the challenges of a changing world, was a providential event in the People of God's preparation for the third Christian millennium. I encourage the lay faithful to study the Council's teaching, to love and live its message. In this way the laity will be light and hope for the Church and for society. May Christ, the Eternal King, guide and strengthen you always!
I extend a cordial greeting to the German-speaking men and women. Dear brothers and sisters, the Second Vatican Council encouraged you lay people to be the salt of the earth and the light of the world. I entrust you with this wish:  never tire of studying the Council's teaching and of applying it to life. For your mission as Gospel witnesses I gladly give you my Apostolic Blessing.
I extend a welcome to the Spanish-speaking pilgrims who are taking part in the Jubilee of the Apostolate of the Laity. May this Jubilee pilgrimage encourage you to continue on the path of hope, building the future according to your specific Christian vocation. Firmly rooted in Christ and sustained by the ever timely teaching of the Second Vatican Council, bear witness to the Gospel among the people of our time.
The happy coincidence of the feast of Christ the King with your Jubilee reminds you all, dear Portuguese-speaking pilgrims, that your vocation as children of God in the world does not only require you to achieve personal holiness, but to walk on the earth's highways, turning them into shortcuts that lead souls, despite the obstacles, to the Lord. This is why we Christians have been called; this is the apostolic task and concern that must consume our souls and make Christ's kingdom a reality, so that there will be no more hatred or cruelty and we can spread the effective and peaceful balm of love throughout the world.
I cordially greet the representatives of the laity from Poland and other countries of the world. You represent the countless throngs of the faithful who, in fulfilling each day their family, professional or social duties, at the same time actively participate in the Church's apostolic action. As we celebrate today the Jubilee of the Apostolate of the Laity, let us thank God for their commitment in various areas of life - most of which are accessible only to them - because of which the Church lives as a community of witnesses to faith, hope and love. I pray that the Holy Spirit will constantly kindle in your hearts a desire to serve the Gospel, so that, in accordance with your vocation and your mandate, you will take part fruitfully in fulfilling the Church's prophetic, priestly and pastoral mission. God bless you!
3. Let us now offer our prayer to Mary. May she help us to achieve that renewal of mind and action, of joy and hope, that was the goal of the Second Vatican Council.
© Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
JUBILEE OF THE AGRICULTURAL WORLD
ANGELUS
Sunday, 12 November 2000
  1. At the end of this solemn Jubilee celebration, I wish to thank the many representatives of the agricultural world who have come here from various nations. I extend a particular greeting to Mr Jacques Diouf, Director-General of the FAO, and to Mr Paolo Bedoni, representing the farmers.
In their addresses they wanted to highlight the challenges but also the enormous potential that agriculture holds today. It is called to play an active and responsible role especially in facing the great problems connected with food and hunger in the world. The balanced use of natural resources and the equitable distribution of available goods will make it possible to offer the world population the food security that everyone desires.
Dear brothers and sisters who form the great family of the agricultural world! Thank you for your joyful presence and for your fervent participation in today's meeting. The Church is close to you! May this Jubilee day encourage and support you all to continue your praiseworthy activity, which is indispensable for the overall progress of the global community!
2. I cordially greet the French-speaking representatives of the agricultural world who are making their Jubilee today. Your activity reminds us that the fruits of the earth and human work are a cooperation in God's creation and an invitation to share with ever greater solidarity so that all people will have enough to eat. To all the pilgrims I warmly grant my Apostolic Blessing.
I offer a cordial welcome to the English-speaking representatives of the world of agriculture and rural life present at today's Jubilee. In your daily encounter with the beauty of God's creation, may you grow closer to the Lord of life, strengthen your commitment to be good stewards of his bountiful gifts, and grow in solidarity with others, especially our brothers and sisters suffering from poverty and hunger. May the Lord of the harvest bless your labours and fill you and your families with his peace.
I cordially greet you, dear farmers, who have come to Rome for your Holy Year celebration. Show respect for the land entrusted to you. Then the earth will produce good fruits, which will bring food and joy to all people. I gladly give you my Apostolic Blessing.
I affectionately greet the Spanish-speaking fieldworkers. Your task, which dignifies man and completes the Creator's work, deserves all the Church's esteem and the respect of public institutions. Foster among yourselves a spirit of solidarity and cooperation, while bearing witness to the universal destination of the earth's goods and promoting the protection of the environment, so that a life worthy of contemporary man and of future generations may be ensured. I cordially bless you all.
I wish the greatest blessings of heaven upon the Portuguese-speaking farmers and workers who live by cultivating the land, so that they can sow and plant in peace and security on friendly soil, which will yield them a hundredfold, and see their children filled with the desire to share with the poorest.
With great joy I greet the pilgrims who have come here from Ukraine. Dear friends, may this Holy Year become a rich time of grace, reconciliation and inner renewal for you all. From my heart I give you and your loved ones my Apostolic Blessing.
I cordially greet the farmers from Poland and other countries who are celebrating their Jubilee today. Through your daily efforts you fulfil in the most direct way the Creator's call for man to subdue the earth. May God bless you in your work so that all men and women may enjoy its fruits in abundance.
They nurture and defend. I cited these words yesterday. Today I repeat them again. They refer to you. Polish farmers, children of the Polish land, nurtured and defended it. Therefore they deserve gratitude and concern for their future. God bless you!
3. I entrust to Mary, Mother of grace, the aspirations and good intentions resulting from this day of intense ecclesial communion. We turn our thoughts now to her, confidently invoking her in the words of the Angelus.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
JUBILEE OF GOVERNMENT LEADERS,
MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT AND POLITICIANS
 ANGELUS
Sunday 5 November 2000
  1. Before the final blessing, I would like to thank all who helped to organize this Jubilee event. I once again urge everyone to deepen and spread the knowledge of St Thomas More, the new patron of statesmen and politicians. His example is truly most appropriate for this purpose: for Sir Thomas More fully lived his Christian identity in the lay state as a husband, an exemplary father and an enlightened statesman. A man of uncompromising integrity, in order to remain faithful to God and to his own conscience he renounced everything: honours, affection, life itself; but by doing so he acquired the most precious good, the kingdom of heaven, from where he watches over all who dedicate themselves generously to the service of the human family in civil and political institutions.
2. In this context, I would like to recall that the Day for Cancer Research is being observed in Italy today. I offer my encouragement to all who are suffering from this disease, and I hope that everyone will find in faith a solid basis for his own hope. To all who are involved in various ways in making cancer less and less dangerous, I express the solidarity and praise of the Church, which has always tried to serve Christ in the sick, at the side of health-care workers.
3. I cordially greet the government leaders, members of parliament and those responsible for public life who are celebrating their Jubilee, as well as all the French-speaking pilgrims present at this celebration. I hope that everyone will find the strength for his daily mission in a personal encounter with Christ. With my Apostolic Blessing. I greet the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors, especially those taking part in the Jubilee of Government Leaders, Members of Parliament and Politicians. Through the intercession of St Thomas More, may all men and women involved in public life be guided by a concern for the common good and act always in accordance with truth and conscience. Upon you and your families, I invoke the grace and peace of our Lord Jesus Christ. I turn now to the pilgrims from German-speaking countries, especially to the men and women with political responsibilities.
The authority that has been given to you means above all service to people. I wish you always to have a pure heart in your important duties. Respect the dignity of each individual, even if he is socially or economically weak, or in poor health. May God's blessing go with you all! I affectionately greet the Spanish-speaking members of parliament and politicians. May this Jubilee pilgrimage encourage you to set out on new paths of hope which, while fully respecting the dignity of the individual, attend to the material, social and spiritual needs of all citizens. A respectful greeting to the Portuguese-speaking government leaders and politicians, with the assurance of my prayer and blessing, so that your mission of service can fulfil the many hopes placed in you by the poorest and most defenceless citizens. I greet the members of parliament from Poland who are participating in this Jubilee meeting. Your presence today shows that you desire to build your personal life and political activity on the teaching of the Gospel. May the grace of Jesus Christ strengthen you. May the Holy Spirit always accompany you with his light on the path of Christian service to man and to society. God bless you!
4. With the Angelus we entrust our intentions to the intercession of Mary Most Holy. In a special way I would ask to pray for the meeting which I will have in a few days with the Catholicos of All Armenians, His Holiness Karekin II. During a solemn ecumenical celebration in St Peter's on 10 November next, I will have the joy of giving him a relic of St Gregory the Illuminator, patron of Armenia. May this ecumenical event in the context of the Jubilee help to hasten our journey to the full communion of all Christians. For this let us pray.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
SOLEMNITY OF ALL SAINTS
ANGELUS
Wednesday 1 November 2000
  1. At the end of this solemn celebration in honour of All Saints, our gaze turns upwards. Today's feast reminds us that we were made for heaven, where Our Lady has already gone and now awaits us.
The Christian life means journeying here below with our hearts turned upwards, towards our heavenly Father's House. This was how the saints journeyed, as the Virgin Mother of the Lord did first of all. The Jubilee reminds us of this essential dimension of holiness: our state as pilgrims who each day seek the kingdom of God while trusting in divine Providence. This is genuine Christian hope, which has nothing to do with fatalism or an escape from history. On the contrary, it spurs us to concrete commitment, as we look to Christ, God made man, who opens for us the way to heaven.
2. In this perspective we are preparing to celebrate All Souls Day tomorrow. We go in spirit to the graves of our loved ones, who have gone before us marked with the sign of faith and now await the support of our prayer. I promise to remember those who lost their lives this year; I am thinking especially of the victims of human violence: in God's heart may they all find the peace for which they long.
3. In this light, Mary appears even more as the Queen of saints and the Mother of our hope. It is to her that we turn, so that she will guide us on the way of holiness and assist us at every moment of our life, now and at the hour of our death.
The Holy Father also greeted the many French-speaking pilgrims participating in the Eucharistic liturgy.
On this All Saints Day I cordially greet the many French-speaking pilgrims who have come to observe the Jubilee and to renew their faith in Christ the Saviour. I am delighted to see the banners assembled here, which have been made with great care and devotion, and I thank all the people who have thus wanted to display the saints of every century. Images of this sort allow us to discover the Church's treasure, the men and women who followed Christ in the priesthood, consecrated life or marriage. Dear friends, may you listen with renewed attention to the call to take the path of holiness, to serve the Lord and your brethren, and to participate in the life of the Church and the world! The Church is counting on you. I bless you wholeheartedly.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
JUBILEE OF SPORTS PEOPLE
ANGELUS
Sunday 29 October 2000
  1. At this time of joy we cannot and must not forget that suffering and death continue in certain regions of the world. I am thinking particularly of the Middle East region.
Once again I wish to ask all the parties involved in the peace process to spare no efforts to restore the atmosphere of dialogue that existed until a few weeks ago. Mutual trust, rejection of weapons and respect for international law are the only way to revive the peace process. Let us pray, therefore, for a return to the negotiating table and, through dialogue, for achieving the longed-for goal of a just and lasting peace that will guarantee everyone the inalienable right to freedom and security.
2. We are now ready to conclude the Eucharistic celebration, the heart of this Jubilee event. We have offered sports to God as a human activity aimed at the full development of the human person and at fraternal social relations. This altar, placed in Rome's great Olympic Stadium, has reminded us that sports too are above all God's gift.
This gift now asks to become mission and witness. In the context of the Jubilee Year, the "Sport Manifesto" will shortly be read, as if to stress the concrete commitment resulting from this Jubilee.
I extend a cordial greeting to all the French-speaking athletes who are taking part in this Jubilee, and invite them to be, through sport, messengers of peace and brotherhood, as well as examples of upright and harmonious living. With my Apostolic Blessing.
Dear English-speaking participants in this Jubilee celebration, sport has brought you together from different countries in a common interest and shared goals. Your passion for sport is a building block of human solidarity, friendship and goodwill among peoples. May your physical exertions be a part of your quest for the higher values which build character and give you dignity and a sense of achievement, in your own eyes and in the eyes of others. In Christian terms, life itself is a contest and a striving for goodness and holiness. May God bless you in your endeavours, and may he fill you and your families with his love and peace.
I cordially greet the German-speaking athletes, coaches and officials. The "nicest triviality in the world" is often marred by harsh competitive pressure. In all seriousness, may this thought give you serenity:  even competition is just a game. Sport should be fun and enjoyable. May God's blessing go with you!
I greet the Spanish-speaking athletes. I invite you to dedicate your efforts to developing the whole person, to fostering peace among peoples and to winning the most valuable prize:  receiving God's mercy and being crowned with Christ's glory.
I extend a friendly and encouraging greeting to the professional and amateur athletes from the various Portuguese-speaking countries, reminding everyone that the goal and greatest prize in life is Jesus Christ. May they never be content with less, and they will victoriously mount the podium of eternity.
I cordially greet the athletes from Poland and other countries of the world. On your Jubilee day, I join you in thanking God for the strength of spirit in which each day you spare no toil and overcome personal weakness in order to achieve your laurels in noble competition in the various disciplines of sport. Your persevering efforts and the joy of victory become a symbol to which anyone who wants to grow spiritually can appeal, particularly the Christian, who, as St Paul says, "fights the good fight", so that once the race of life is over, he may receive from Christ's hands the "crown of righteousness" (cf. 2 Tm 4:6-7). God bless you in giving this particular witness.
3. We now turn to Mary Most Holy, invoking her maternal protection on the entire world of sport, so that it may always be inspired by authentic values and contribute to the integral development of the human person and of society.
© Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday 22 October 2000
    1. The Jubilee celebration we are about to conclude was preceded in the past few days by the World Mission Congress, in which Bishops, priests, religious and lay people from every corner of the world took part. I cordially thank all those involved in such an important ecclesial meeting, which is so promising for the new evangelization.
Every local Church arises from mission, and the presence here of representatives from so many countries of the world shows the unanimous gratitude being raised to heaven for the gift of evangelization they have received. Every Church grows and matures when she sends missionaries to proclaim the Gospel to other peoples. This is the meaning of the mandate, which is being given today to many "missionaries" along with the cross. At the beginning of the third millennium, therefore, this signifies a new, courageous start for a renewed missionary season.
The congress participants have symbolically brought here a bit of soil from various countries, which has been combined with the others in a single container. In this "soil of all the soils" an olive tree, a symbol of peace, will be planted in remembrance of this Jubilee day. The Gospel of Christ, in fact, is the Gospel of peace. May every nation open itself to Christ and find the way of peace!
2. All Christ's followers are called to mission. I urge you therefore to continue to support the missionary work of the Church through your prayers and financial help. Pray especially for more workers for the Lord's harvest. Upon all the English-speaking pilgrims present I invoke the abundant gifts of the Holy Spirit.
I greet the French-speaking participants in the Jubilee of Missions and invite them to pursue their commitment to proclaiming the Gospel, following the example of their forerunners, such as Pauline Jaricot. With my Apostolic Blessing.
I cordially greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims, especially the missionaries who spread the message of Christ across the earth in order to give hope to the world. I invite the Ecclesial Communities to be one with them in prayer, affection and necessary aid, thus taking part in a magnificent task that belongs to the whole Church.
My greetings to the pilgrims from German-speaking countries, especially the missionaries. I know what the commitment to God's kingdom costs you: not only sweat and tears, but also vitality, health and sometimes even your life. May God reward you for all your efforts and give you fulfilment in your work. I bless each and every one of you.
Dear Portuguese-speaking missionaries, Jesus is the Saviour of all and is counting on you so that everyone may know him. Go! My Blessing on you and on your communities of origin and destination.
I cordially greet the pilgrims from Poland. Today, which is specially dedicated to the missions, I ask all my compatriots to continue supporting the Church's mission activity with their prayer and generosity. In your daily prayers do not fail to ask for many new vocations to mission work. I cordially embrace all missionaries: priests, religious and lay people. I entrust you all to the protection of Mary, Queen of Apostles.
To Mary Most Holy, the Star of Evangelization, we entrust the Church's mission in the contemporary world.
And in remembrance of the first Angelus on 22 October 1978, I say again to young people: "You are the hope of the Church. You are my hope". It is still the same today!
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
JUBILEE OF FAMILIES
  ANGELUS
Sunday 15 October 2000
  Before concluding our celebration, we turn in prayer to Mary Most Holy, who supports families with her maternal care. As a sign of devoted gratitude, on 9 December next, in the name of all families, a delegation led by Cardinal López Trujillo will a take a golden rose that I have blessed as a gift to Our Lady of Loreto.
I am also happy to announce that the next World Meeting of Families will take place in 2003 in Manila. I now extend my most cordial thanks to the beloved Church in the Philippines for their willing cooperation.
To all the French-speaking families who have come to make their Jubilee and to those who have joined us by radio and television, I extend a cordial greeting. Welcome Christ into your homes!
Dear parents, he will help you to fulfil your mission to your children. Dear young people, the Church loves you and has confidence that you will develop your talents and put them at the service of your brothers and sisters. With my affectionate Apostolic Blessing.
I greet all the English-speaking pilgrims present for the Jubilee of Families. Do all you can to defend and promote the essential role of the family in society, as the natural cradle of new life, the first school of human development and of faith. God bless you with harmony and peace.
I now turn to the German-speaking families. I greet the married couples who are faithful to each other. I welcome the children who can learn the first lessons of life and faith from their parents.
Lastly, I am also thinking of everyone who lives alone and has neither a partner nor a family. May God, who accompanies us on our way, bless you all!
I affectionately greet the Spanish-speaking families and those who could not be here today precisely because of family duties. Open the doors of your homes to Christ, so that he may be your strength and your joy, that he may help you to live in unity and to proclaim to the world the invincible power of true love.
It is with great affection that I greet the Portuguese-speaking families:  from Brazil, Portugal and other countries of the world. May the Holy Spirit, the Consoler, enlighten your homes so that they may sow peace and joy, trusting always in the merciful love of Christ our Saviour.
I cordially greet all the Polish families - those who have come to Rome and those who are observing their Jubilee at home. I thank God for the joy and peace of happy families. I ardently pray that his grace and blessing will be an effective support for families that are experiencing various difficulties. I also pray that Polish families will truly be "strong in God". I embrace them all in my heart and entrust them to the protection of the Holy Family of Nazareth.
Before closing, I would like to thank you again for your perseverance and your courage despite this rain! A blessing for all the families of the world and especially for the newly-weds!
© Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 1 October 2000
  1. The saints who were raised to the glory of the altars today spur us to turn our gaze to Christ.
Their lives were rooted in faith in him, the Redeemer of all mankind, the Only-begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father and has made him known (cf. Jn 1: 18). The saints invite us to acknowledge him with joy, to love him sincerely and to bear witness to him.
With the Declaration Dominus Iesus - Jesus is Lord - approved by me in a special way at the height of the Jubilee Year, I wanted to invite all Christians to renew their fidelity to him in the joy of faith and to bear unanimous witness that the Son, both today and tomorrow, is "the way, and the truth, and the life" (Jn 14: 6). Our confession of Christ as the only Son, through whom we ourselves see the Father's face (cf. Jn 14: 8), is not arrogance that disdains other religions, but joyful gratitude that Christ has revealed himself to us without any merit on our part. At the same time, he has obliged us to continue giving what we have received and to communicate to others what we have been given, since the Truth that is has been given and the Love which is God belong to all people.
With the Apostle Peter, we confess that "there is salvation in no one else" (Acts 4: 12). The Declaration Dominus Iesus, following the lead of the Second Vatican Council, shows us that this confession does not deny salvation to non-Christians, but points to its ultimate source in Christ, in whom man and God are united. God gives light to all in a way which is accomodated to their spiritual and material situation, granting them salvific grace in ways known to himself (Dominus Iesus, VI, nn. 20-21). The Document clarifies essential Christian elements, which do not hinder dialogue but show its bases, because a dialogue without foundations would be destined to degenerate into empty wordiness.
The same also applies to the ecumenical question. If the document, together with the Second Vatican Council, declares that "the single Church of Christ subsists in the Catholic Church", it does not intend thereby to express scant regard for the other Churches and Ecclesial Communities. This conviction is accompanied by the awareness that it is not due to human merit, but is a sign of God's fidelity, which is stronger than the human weaknesses and sins solemnly confessed by us before God and men at the beginning of Lent. The Catholic Church - as the Document says - suffers from the fact that true particular Churches and Ecclesial Communities with precious elements of salvation are separated from her.
The document thus expresses once again the same ecumenical passion that is the basis of my Encyclical Ut unum sint. I hope that this Declaration, which is close to my heart, can, after so many erroneous interpretations, finally fulfil its function both of clarification and of openness. May Mary, whom the Lord on the Cross entrusted to us as the Mother of us all, help us to grow together in our faith in Christ, the Redeemer of all mankind, in the hope of salvation offered by Christ to everyone, and in love, which is the sign of God's children.
2. With affection I greet all the faithful gathered here to honour the Chinese Martyrs, especially those of you of Chinese origin, who are seeing for the first time the canonization of martyrs belonging to your own people.
Likewise, my thoughts reach out to all the Catholic faithful in China. I know that you are spiritually united with us, and I am certain that you understand that this is a special moment of grace for the whole Church and for the entire Catholic community in China. I wish to assure you once more that I pray for you every day. May the Holy Martyrs comfort and sustain you as, like them, you bravely and generously bear witness both to your fidelity to Jesus Christ and to your genuine love of your people.
(In Chinese) I wish you peace.
3. At the end of this celebration at which a large group of witnesses to the faith were canonized, I greet all the Spanish-speaking pilgrims, especially those who come from the native lands of the new Dominican martyrs:  Palencia, Tarragon, Granada, Teruel and Seville, and the Basque country, the cradle of St María Josefa of the Heart of Jesus Sancho de Guerra. May her shining example also help you to be courageous witnesses of Jesus Christ in the noble and ever beloved land of Spain.
4. At the same time I warmly greet the Sudanese Bishops and faithful, and the large group of pilgrims from the United States, in particular from Philadelphia. Through the intercession of the new saints, Katharine Drexel and Josephine Bakhita, may your faith grow ever stronger and your witness to the Gospel be ever more effective.
5. I extend a respectful greeting to the government delegations from various countries who have wished to take part in this canonization.
Let us now pray to Mary, Queen of All Saints, to help every Christian to be a credible witness to the Gospel.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday 24 September 2000
1. Before concluding today's Jubilee celebration, I would like to say a cordial "thank you" to all of you, dear brothers and sisters, gathered here from every part of the world. Among the many Italian delegations I greet in particular that of the Mariological Association and those of the shrines, among which Loreto and Pompei stand out.
I then extend a special greeting to the citizens of Lecco: to the large group of pilgrims present here and to those who are following us live from the city's main square. I thank you for the gifts you have offered to the congress, and for your generous contribution to rebuilding the national Shrine of La-Vang in Viêt Nam.
I greet all the French-speaking people present at the Angelus, especially the members of the International Marian Congress. I am praying for the faithful who have gathered at the Marian shrines to entrust themselves to Our Lady, in particular at Lourdes, Banneux, La-Vang and Poponguine. I join in the joy of the Diocese of Puy-en-Velay, an important place of pilgrimage to the Virgin Mary, which will host the next International Marian Congress.
From St Peter's Square my thoughts reach out to the Marian Shrines in the English-speaking world, and with affection I greet the faithful who gather in these holy places to honour the Mother of God. Among the many Marian places of pilgrimage I mention in particular: Walsingham in England, Knock in Ireland, The Shrine of the Immaculate Conception in Washinton in the United States, Our Lady of Good Voyage in Antipolo in the Philippines, Velankanni in India. In this Jubilee Year, may all of us feel more intensely Mary's motherly presence and protection.
My thoughts turn to all the places of Marian devotion in the German-speaking countries, especially those of Altötting, Kevelaier, Einsiedeln and Marizell. During my Pastoral Visits I have had the opportunity to pray in these sacred places for the Church and for the world. Through the intercession of the holy Mother of God, I invoke abundant blessings of God upon you.
On this Marian Day of the Great Jubilee, I cordially greet the Spanish-speaking faithful who are visiting the Marian Shrines of their own land. In particular, I recall the representatives who are here today from: Guadalupe in Mexico, Luján in Argentina, Chiquinquirá of Colombia, El Pilar of Spain, Merced in Ecuador, Monserrate in Puerto Rico and Our Lady of the Angels in Costa Rica. I commend you all to the Virgin Mary's protection.
This is also a favourable occasion to recall the Shrines of Aparecida in Brazil and of Fátima in Portugal, of which I cherish particular memories because of being connected with the special protection of the Most Holy Virgin in these years of my Pontificate. Dear Portuguese-speaking pilgrims who visit these and other Marian shrines, always pray to God through Mary, Mother of Our Saviour, Jesus Christ.
While in my thoughts and in my heart I visit the Shrines of Mariapocs, Mariagyud, and Mariremete in Hungary, I greet the President of the Hungarian nation and the large Magyar delegation present in St Peter's Square today.
In concluding the International Mariological-Marian Congress I think back to my pilgrimage to Jasna Góra and beloved Kalwaria, and to all the Marian shrines in Poland. In spirit, I visit the Shrine of Svatá Hora u Príbrami in the Czech Republic, that of the Mother of the Seven Sorrows at Sastín in Slovakia and Marija Bistrica in Croatia; the Shrines of Ostra Brama in Lithuania, Aglona in Latvia and Zarvanycha in Ukraine, as well as the famous Orthodox Church of Kazan in Russia, and the other places in Central and Eastern Europe which are sanctified by the special presence of the Mother of God and by the prayer of those who seek refuge in her. On the Day of the Jubilee of Shrines, I would like to be present in a special way in those sacred places, to entrust the Church and the whole world to the Blessed Virgin's motherly protection.
Mary, Mother of Christ and of the Church, pray for us!
2. Dear friends, in this atmosphere of intense Marian devotion, let us now recite the prayer of the Angelus together. May the Mother of the Incarnate Word help everyone to collaborate generously in the work of the Redemption.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
JUBILEE OF THE ELDERLY
ANGELUS

17 September 2000

Before imparting the final blessing, I would like once again to greet each one of you, dear elderly brothers and sisters, and with you, thank God who has granted us to reach the Year 2000 and to celebrate the Great Jubilee. May your faith, which you have renewed and professed on this happy occasion, always give peace and comfort to you and to your loved ones.
I then address a special word of appreciation to all who have generously given themselves to accompany and help you on your Jubilee. How can I omit to emphasize the thousands of choristers who made the celebration so beautiful and solemn with their hymns? Your harmonious voices, dear friends, rising towards heaven from this square, gave our prayer a special intensity which has certainly echoed in God's heart. Truly "those who sing pray twice"! I thank you on everyone's behalf. Today the old thank the young!
I address a cordial welcome to the French-speaking faithful, especially those taking part in the Jubilee of the Elderly. May the Apostles Peter and Paul, whom you have come to pray and honour, always help you pass on your faith and experience to the young generations with enthusiasm. May the Virgin Mary accompany you! I most cordially bless you all.
With great affection in the Lord I greet the English-speaking participants in the Jubilee of the Elderly. The serene presence of older people is a blessing for every family and community. You are the ones who have struggled long and hard to pass on a better world to the young. May you experience the loving respect and care of those close to you! God bless you always!
Today I extend my heartfelt greetings to the elderly German-speaking pilgrims who are making their Holy Year pilgrimage to Rome. Dear elderly people, live the evening of your life with serenity and joy; praying intensely and thereby strengthened, dedicate yourselves to works in the service of your neighbour. I now impart my Apostolic Blessing to you all.
I cordially greet the various elderly Spanish-speaking groups. May this Jubilee pilgrimage be a privileged opportunity for all of you to thank God for all the gifts you have received, especially that of the faith and of your own life. As I entrust you to the protection of the Blessed Virgin Mary and of St Joseph, I impart my Blessing to you all.
To all of you, elderly brothers and sisters, I express the wish that you will live with patient resignation the years which the Lord establishes for each one as messengers of Christian peace and happiness in your homes and communities; ever ready to bear witness to the hope that is in you, through faith in Christ our Saviour.
I cordially greet the elderly people who have come to Rome from Poland and from the other countries of the world to take part in this Jubilee solemnity. I also greet with affection those who have joined us via radio and television. I hope that all my compatriots who have had the opportunity to live so many years will be able - supported by God's grace and the tender love of their families - to enrich the beginning of the new millennium with the fruits of their experience. God bless you!
May the example and intercession of the Blessed Virgin help every elderly person also to see in old age a call to cooperate generously in God's loving plan.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
JUBILEE OF UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS
  ANGELUS
Sunday 10 September 2000
  1. Today's solemn celebration, prepared for by numerous international conventions and culminating in the days at Rome, brings the Jubilee of University Teachers to a close. I renew my thanks to all the organizers and participants. I hope that each will draw from it the best fruits for himself and for the university community to which he belongs.
2. I warmly greet the French-speaking university teachers who have come to take part in their Jubilee, as well as all the other pilgrims. May this meeting help you strive constantly for the truth and daringly pursue your commitments to promoting the dignity of the person as well as his human and spiritual growth! I cordially impart my Apostolic Blessing to you all.
3. I wish to greet the English-speaking participants in this Jubilee celebration for university teachers and to express my heartfelt thanks for their witness to the Gospel of Jesus Christ in the academic world. I pray that each of you, together with the institutions from which you come and the students whom you guide along the paths of higher learning, will be ever filled with the light and strength of the Holy Spirit, so that the new generations will always have the flame of faith, hope and love burning brightly within them!
4. I greet the Spanish-speaking university teachers with affection. May this Jubilee pilgrimage be an incentive in your task of teaching, encouraging people's integral education and also bearing witness to the love of Christ who is the Way, the Truth and the Life.
5. I greet the Portuguese-speaking university teachers who are living these Jubilee days with Christ. He was once lost among the doctors; do not let this be repeated today! Witness with friendliness and respect to the hope that Jesus has sown in you. I wish the same to the members of the Franciscan pilgrimage from the Diocese of Viseu.
6. I extend a heartfelt greeting to the German-speaking university teachers. Like laboratories, institutes of higher learning must be places where wisdom builds its house. Scholars must not do all the things of which they are capable. For this great responsibility, I impart my Apostolic Blessing to you all.
7. I cordially greet all the university teachers who represent the Polish universities. Your participation in this Jubilee meeting is a testimony of faith and of the deep desire to be united to Christ, the Teacher. May his grace be a support and inspiration to you in your scientific and didactic work. Bring my greeting to all the universities in Poland. May God bless you!
8. Let us entrust these wishes and hopes to Mary Most Holy, Seat of Wisdom and Mother of the Church. With her heavenly intercession, may she guide the path of each one towards knowledge of the full truth in Christ, her Son.
© Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II  
ANGELUS 
Sunday, 3 September 2000
     Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. At the end of this solemn celebration, I affectionately greet the Italian-speaking pilgrims, with a particular thought for those from Senigallia, Spoleto and Imola, from Sotto il Monte, Bergamo and Venice, from Genoa, Ventimiglia and Liguria. I thank you all for your devout presence and I urge you to follow the example of the new blesseds.
I cordially greet the French-speaking visitors, especially the young people, and all the pilgrims of the Marianist Family who have come for the beatification of Fr Chaminade. Dear friends, may your prayer this Sunday strengthen your faith and increase your desire to follow Christ truly on the path of holiness! I bless you all from my heart.
I extend a warm welcome to the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors, especially those who have come from Ireland for the beatification of Dom Columba Marmion. Holiness is a great challenge and duty for all Christ's followers in every age. May the example of the new beati guide, strengthen and encourage our discipleship. God be with you and with your families!
2. The new blesseds were deeply devoted to Mary. The Christian people will always be grateful to Pius IX, the Pope of the dogma of the Immaculate Conception, for having proclaimed this stupendous truth of faith, which gives life and hope for the destiny of the world and of every human being.
In his Journal of a Soul, John XXIII left the witness of a filial love for the Blessed Virgin, which is summed up in the invocation:  "My Mother, my trust".
Bishop Tommaso Reggio presented Mary as a model for women of every age and condition; she is the "woman par excellence, the clearest mirror which reflects and teaches what are the best actions to do out of love for her Son".
Addressing his confrères, Fr Chaminade used to say:  "We are the missionaries of Mary, who has said to us:  "Do whatever he [Christ] tells you'".
Lastly, Abbot Marmion wrote in his famous book Christ the Life of the Soul:  "If Jesus Christ is our Saviour because he took on our human nature, how can we truly love him, how can we be perfectly like him, without having a particular devotion to her from whom he received this human nature?".
May Mary, Queen of Saints, help us to fulfil the Lord's will faithfully in our lives, as did these new blesseds.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS  

Castel Gandolfo, Sunday 27 August 2000
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. The echo of World Youth Day has not faded from public opinion. For several days Rome was filled with the beating hearts of young people, who won everyone's approval. They were joyful, peaceful young people with a ready greeting and smile, respectful of the city and of nature, in love with Jesus Christ and his message. They are a people entering the third millennium with new energy.
Some of those young people are still in Rome and a group of them are here today. These are the "Gen" young people of the Focolare Movement, whom I see in large numbers and greet most affectionately, with gratitude for their visit.
Let us thank the Lord for the good that the Jubilee of young people has sown in the Church and in the world. Their great numbers made a strong impression on everyone. World Youth Day however is only one stage on a journey that must continue. Every young person, on returning to his country, is called to deepen his own choice of the Gospel and his consistency of life. In this regard, during the unforgettable Vigil at Tor Vergata, I spoke of the "school of faith", that wonderful spiritual school at which each person, in dialogue with God, can grow in the knowledge of his faith and become a convincing witness to Christ.
2. Almost as a continuation of the Jubilee of Young People, on next Sunday, 3 September, the Jubilee of University Teachers will begin.
Its theme will be: "The University for a New Humanism". At the threshold of the third millennium, the Church once again offers Christ's message to the world of culture, especially that of the university, as the source of a vision of humanity and of the world in which God's plan is fully reflected. In its light new generations can be formed and prepared to face the great challenges of history, to build societies marked by solidarity and concern for individuals, especially the weakest.
It is therefore necessary to foster an intense and attentive dialogue between faith and culture, so that the latter may be reborn from its encounter with the ancient and ever new Good News.
3. I entrust the fruits of the World Youth Day and the success of the forthcoming Jubilee of Universities to Our Lady, Mother of the Church and Virgin of the total and generous "yes" to the Lord's call. May she help young people to keep alive the burning spark of God's love. May she obtain for everyone an active desire for holiness, in order to be a leaven and Gospel ferment in human cities.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims in various languages. To the English-speaking he said:
I warmly greet the new students of the Pontifical North American College. May your "Roman experience" strengthen you in love for the Church and for the priesthood for which you are preparing. I extend a special welcome to the Indonesian pilgrims present, assuring you of my prayers for peace in your country. Upon all the English-speaking pilgrims I invoke the loving protection of Mary, Mother of the Redeemer.
The Holy Father also greeted a group of his former university students who gave him a paddle from the kayaking trips he used to take with them in the summer.
I also greet my "Milieu" (Srodowisko), whom I have been expecting for so long. How many stories this paddle could tell! How many happy stories, but sad ones too. Thank you very much for coming and for this paddle. Twenty-two years ago I put this paddle aside to take up another one. God bless you all. God reward you for your visit.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
15th WORLD YOUTH DAY
ANGELUS
Tor Vergata, Sunday 20 August 2000
  At the conclusion of this Eucharistic celebration our thoughts turn to the “Woman” about whom Saint Paul spoke in the second reading of today’s Mass (Gal 4:4): the Blessed Virgin Mary, on whose feast of the Assumption we began this Fifteenth World Youth Day. With her loving and motherly presence Mary has guided these days in Rome, days of an intense experience of faith. We wish to express all our gratitude to her for her “yes” which marked the beginning of the “adventure” of our Redemption.
As I ask the Blessed Virgin to watch over all the youth of the world, boys and girls alike, I express heartfelt thanks to you who have taken part in this Fifteenth World Youth Day.
I greet and thank first of all those who organized this event: the Pontifical Council for the Laity, guided by Cardinal James Francis Stafford; the Vicariate of Rome and the Italian Episcopal Conference, led by Cardinal Camillo Ruini; the President and members of the Italian Committee for the Fifteenth World Youth Day, as well as the parish communities of Rome and neighbouring Dioceses, their associations, movements and groups, which for nearly three years have prayed and worked with enthusiasm to prepare for this event. I ask all of you to see to it that the rich legacy of good which this common undertaking has produced is not wasted.
I thank also the public Authorities, who with great dedication ensured that the complex organizational machinery of the World Youth Day functioned in the best way possible.
Finally I greet so many Cardinals and Bishops present, as well as the priests, the Religious women and men, the teachers and all of you, young people of the world, “my joy and my crown” (Phil 4:1)
Before we leave this great and beautiful gathering, I want to announce that the next World Youth Day will be held in Toronto, Canada, in the summer of 2002. Right from now I invite the young people of the world to set out for Toronto, and I offer a special greeting to the Canadian delegation, who wanted to be here at this celebration to accept the task which will be theirs. Upon them and all that they are undertaking I invoke the protection of the Virgin Mary.
Greetings in different languages
With affection and gratitude I greet you all.
Let us all together ask Our Lady to protect each one of us on our journey.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II 
ANGELUS

Castel Gandolfo, Tuesday 15 August 2000
Solemnity of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. Today the Church is celebrating the glorious Assumption into heaven of Mary Most Holy. The People of God, guided by Revelation, have always believed that the Mother of Christ was associated with her Son's victory over death, and venerate her glorious Assumption in soul and body.
Chosen by God as the purest vessel in which to "come and dwell" among men, Mary, at the end of her earthly existence, was immediately taken up into heaven. This is why the Christian community, in a renowned hymn, joyfully sings her praise and invokes her: "Hail, O steadfast foundation of faith; / Hail, O shining emblem of grace.... /Hail, O key to the kingdom of Christ / Hail, O Hope for the ages of bliss.... / Hail, for the heavenly rejoice with the earth; / Hail, for the earthly meet the heavens in song!" (Akathistos).
The feast of the Assumption, celebrated with popular festivals almost everywhere, coincides with "Ferragosto", which is synonymous with the summer holidays. I urge everyone, especially those on holiday, to rediscover the Christian meaning of today's feast by participating in the Eucharistic celebration and by praying with devotion to our heavenly Mother.
Our Lady's Assumption reminds us that our true homeland is heaven, and she offers us her motherly help to prepare for the definitive meeting with Christ at the end of our earthly pilgrimage.
2. This year, 15 August, in the heart of the Holy Year, also marks the beginning of the world youth meeting. Many have arrived in recent days, and this afternoon the official opening of the 15th World Youth Day will take place with the rite of welcoming, first at St John Lateran and then in St Peter's Square.
I thank the organizers and the many volunteers for all they have done and for what they will do in the coming days to ensure the success of the Great Jubilee of Young People. In particular I thank the families, parishes, schools and institutes which have opened their doors to offer hospitality to young pilgrims from every part of the world. It can be said that from today until next Sunday, Rome will be the youth capital of the world!
3. Let us invoke upon this Jubilee event the motherly protection of the Blessed Virgin. We invoke her, counting on the intercession of St Maximilian Mary Kolbe, priest and martyr, whose memorial we celebrated yesterday. May the Queen of Heaven, whom he so loved, continue to guide the earthly path of her children, especially that of the new generations, and remind everyone of the glorious goal where she has preceded us and awaits us.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims and visitors in various languages:
Dear English-speaking pilgrims: Mary's Assumption into heaven speaks to us of the great hope which sustains all Christian hearts - that one day we will be with her in the kingdom of her Son, Our Lord Jesus Christ. May the Blessed Mother's intercession strengthen our faith and love as we journey on to our eternal destiny. I commend you and your families to the powerful protection of the Queen of Heaven.
Dear French-speaking pilgrims, welcome on this feast of the Assumption! May the Blessed Virgin Mary help you welcome Christ into your life each day, as she was able to do so well, and to serve others! Pray for the many young people gathered in Rome for their World Day at this time. I wholeheartedly bless you all.
I now cordially greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims present here, as well as those who have joined in this Marian prayer of the Angelus by radio or television. The World Youth Day begins today, the Solemnity of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary. I especially entrust to Our Lady and Mother each and every one of the young people who have come to Rome from Latin America and Spain for this great meeting, as I affectionately impart my Apostolic Blessing to you and your families.
Dear pilgrims from German-speaking countries, I am very pleased that you have come to my summer residence to honour Mary. Today is her feast day, the "Great Women's Day"! What in salvation history happened to the "great woman" is also our hope: at the end of time, to live with Christ entirely - in body and soul. I gladly impart my Apostolic Blessing to you!
My affectionate greeting also goes to all the Portuguese-speaking people here: May your earthly pilgrimage always follow the shining path of Our Lady of the Assumption! In giving us Jesus, she was placed where everyone could see her as the "Morning Star" guiding them to a good haven, the safe harbour that is God. Fix your gaze on her and you will never be lost.
I cordially greet all the pilgrims gathered today at Jasna Góra under the leadership of the Cardinal Primate and the Polish Episcopate. In a special way I greet the young people who, at the foot of Our Lady of Jasna Góra, are joined in prayer with their peers from all over the world who are participating in the Jubilee meeting of young people in Rome.
I commend to your prayers all the events of the Church and of my ministry. I entrust you all to Mary's gracious protection. God bless you!
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II 
ANGELUS

Castel Gandolfo, Sunday 13 August 2000

     Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. Yesterday in Turin the Exposition of the Holy Shroud opened and will continue until 22 October. Not long after it was last displayed, this new and important spiritual initiative stresses the close link between the message of the Shroud and the Jubilee Year. I cordially thank Archbishop Severino Poletto of Turin, Papal Custodian of the Shroud, and his assistants for offering believers, who will come from every direction, the possibility of venerating this unique witness to Christ.
Everyone who has the opportunity to contemplate it is deeply impressed. This happened to me as well. In fact I am deeply moved by the memory of my visits:  the first, a few weeks after my election to the See of Peter, the second during my visit to Turin in 1980 and the third on my May 1998 pilgrimage, after the terrible fire that threatened to cause it serious damage. Each time was a profound experience of grace! For in the Man of the Shroud God's infinite love speaks to every human heart.
2. Many young people have arranged to meet in Turin for the start of the Exposition of the Shroud. This is also a providential coincidence. In fact, the opening was conceived as a sort of introduction to the World Youth Day now close at hand. On the evening of 15 August I will have the joy of welcoming to Rome the participants in this extraordinary world meeting. In the days that follow, they will have various moments for catechesis, prayer and celebration, before the final meeting at Tor Vergata, where I am counting on being present at the great Vigil on Saturday evening and the solemn Eucharistic celebration on Sunday morning.
The world youth pilgrimage started in St Peter's Square 15 years ago and, under the guidance of the same Cross, has traveled round the world. Now that Cross has returned to Rome, carried by a group of young people from the Diocese of Mantua, who have made the journey on foot from Castiglione delle Stiviere, the homeland of St Aloysius Gonzaga. I offer them a special greeting, which I extend to all the young pilgrims who are guests in Italian Dioceses, where they are sharing the joy of the same faith and preparing to come to Rome. However, my thoughts affectionately embrace every young person who will join us in spirit in these coming days, as well as those who feel distant. I say to all:  God is close to you and loves you; welcome him!
3. I invite you all to pray that those who come to Rome for the World Youth Day can meet Christ and be strengthened by him in faith and in their determination to follow him consistently. We ask this through the intercession of Mary, Mother of Christ and of the Church.
After reciting the Angelus the Pope greeted the pilgrims in various languages. To the English-speaking he said: 
I invite all the English-speaking pilgrims, especially the young people present, to invoke with me Mary's unfailing protection and guidance on the World Youth Day. God's blessings be with you and your families!
   © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II 
ANGELUS  

Castel Gandolfo, Sunday 6 August 2000
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. Today, 6 August, is the feast of the Transfiguration of Our Lord Jesus Christ, a liturgical celebration which Christians of the East and West observe on the same day.
In the context of the Great Jubilee, His Holiness Bartholomew I, the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople, took the initiative of inviting all Christians to join in an extended Prayer Vigil on the eve of this feast. The Catholic Church joyfully accepted this appeal, and yesterday evening an inspiring vigil was held at the Roman Basilica of St John Lateran, in a communion of faith and intentions.
It was a fitting occasion to emphasize our common profession of faith in Jesus Christ, Son of God, and our desire to obey his Gospel. According to today's Gospel account, Jesus "was transfigured" before Peter, James and John: "his face shone like the sun, and his garments became white as light" (Mt 17: 2). Through the veil of his humanity, the Son of God, "Light from Light", revealed himself. And this was confirmed by a mysterious voice from on high: "This is my beloved Son with whom I am well pleased. Listen to him" (Mt 17: 5). Here we have a true epiphany:  the manifestation of God's Son to the world.
2. We are at the centre of the Christian mystery and, consequently, of the Great Jubilee, which spurs us to renew our fidelity to Christ. The various Jubilee events are, in fact, privileged occasions for believers to encounter him and to tell him anew of their firm will to cooperate in his universal plan of salvation. World Youth Day, now close at hand, will be celebrated in this same spirit. Many young people are already traveling to Rome by every means; families, parishes, institutes and schools have been mobilized to welcome them, and I too will have the joy of hosting some of them here in Castel Gandolfo. Let us pray that this important event in the heart of the Jubilee will be a great opportunity for the world's young people to renew their generous fidelity to Christ.
3. The feast of the Transfiguration calls to mind my beloved Predecessor, the Servant of God Paul VI, who died precisely on 6 August in 1978, which was a Sunday then, as it is today.
He was an inspired preacher of the Transfiguration, in which he contemplated the whole mystery of Christ, true man and true God. With fervent love and wise teaching Paul VI showed Christ, "Teacher, Pastor, Light of the soul" to contemporary man, who is often bewildered by thousands of deceptive attractions. "He is necessary", he said in a homily, "and we cannot do without him; he is our fortune, joy and happiness, our promise and hope; our way, our truth and our life" (Insegnamenti, III [1965], 1192).
May the Virgin Mary, whom Paul VI revered with filial affection, help all Christians to be faithful witnesses to the Lord. May she also support the efforts being made by Christians of various denominations to advance courageously on the path of full unity.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
On this feast of the Transfiguration, I hope that French-speaking people will generously receive the light of the Gospel, so that it may brighten their whole lives and enable them to be fervent witnesses to Christ, "the Light of the peoples", among their brethren.
I cordially greet the pilgrims from the Diocese of Papeete in French Polynesia, as well as the members of the De Habicht family who have come to Rome on their Jubilee pilgrimage. I cordially impart my Apostolic Blessing to everyone.
I gladly greet the English-speaking visitors present today in Castel Gandolfo, and in particular the Mary Hope of Christians Group from Hong Kong. May the Blessed Mother accompany you all on your Jubilee pilgrimage.
I extend a cordial greeting to the German-speaking pilgrims who have come to Castel Gandolfo on the feast of the Transfiguration of the Lord. I would especially like to mention the two pilgrims from Lusatia who made the long trip to Rome in an unusual way: they came on horseback. With the wish that our every pilgrimage will lead to the Mount of the Transfiguration, I gladly give you my Apostolic Blessing.
I would like to express my cordial welcome to the Spanish-speaking pilgrims, especially to the Salesians who have come from Barcelona and Puebla. I ask the Lord to show his transfigured face to you too, as he did to Peter, James and John, so that you may receive from him the strength to bear witness to his love at every moment.
I extend a cordial greeting to the Italian-speaking pilgrims, in particular the parish groups from Conegliano Veneto, Falzé di Piave, Borgosotto di Montichiari, Mapello, Novate Milanese, Sesto Cremonese, Bologna and Castel Giuliano di Bracciano.
I also greet the priests and lay people taking part in the Spiritual Exercises of the FAC Movement; the Franciscan Fraternity of San Giovanni Gemini in the Diocese of Agrigento; the sick people from the Diocese of Ancona-Osimo, including many with disabilities; and the crew of the ship Costa Riviera.
I extend my good wishes to the Teaching Sisters of St Dorothy and their Cooperators, who are following us from St Peter's Square.
Lastly, I greet the pilgrims from Poland: from Swiatniki Górne, Goldap, Mikolow, Warmia, Opole, from Sacred Heart of Jesus Parish in Rybnik-Boguszowice, from St Hyacinth Parish in Sosnowiec, the altar servers from Konin, the pastoral centre of the Palottine Fathers, the pilgrimage on foot from Jasna Góra and the women religious from Belarus. God bless everyone!
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II 
ANGELUS  

Castel Gandolfo, Sunday 30 July 2000
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. Even in the height of summer the Great Jubilee continues non-stop. Yesterday St Peter's Square witnessed a great gathering of pilgrims, including members of the Cursillos de Cristiandad Movement, which began 50 years ago in Spain and has spread to many countries of the world.
Cursillos, like similar ecclesial movements, are characterized by a new evangelization of adults. The Christian message is presented through moments of intense spiritual experience that enable them to rediscover the beauty of meeting Christ and of being Church, as well as the joy of brotherhood and mutual service, while imbuing their whole lives with the Christian spirit.
2. The need for an integral Christianity, which cuts no corners with the truth and at the same time knows how to meet the challenge of history and modernity, marked all of the last century and became strongly apparent at the Second Vatican Ecumenical Council.
The Church has understood more and more clearly, in the course of the sometimes tragic events of past decades, that her task is care and responsibility for man, not "abstract" man, but real, "concrete", "historical" man, to whom she constantly offers Christ, his only Redeemer. For only in Christ - and we never tire of repeating it, especially during this Jubilee Year - can human beings find the full, true meaning of their existence. Christianity therefore cannot be reduced to a doctrine, or to mere principles, because Christ, the centre of Christianity, is alive and his presence constitutes the event which continually renews human creatures and the cosmos. This truth of Christ must be vigorously proclaimed today, as it was courageously defended in the 20th century by so many witnesses to the faith and by renowned Christian thinkers, including one whom I would like to recall today, Vladimir Sergeyevich Soloviev, the centenary of whose death occurs in a few days.
In recalling this Russian figure of extraordinary depth, who also noted with great clarity the tragic division among Christians and the urgent need for their unity, I would like to invite you to pray that Christians of the East and West can restore their full communion as soon as possible. For this to happen, it is indispensable that they all be converted to Christ, alive yesterday, today and always, and that, by living his Gospel without compromise, they become the leaven of a new humanity. This is the prayer we raise to heaven today, supported by Mary Most Holy, Seat of Divine Wisdom, to whom we now turn with confidence.
After praying the Angelus and giving his Blessing, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims and visitors in various languages:
I now greet the pilgrims here, in particular, those taking part in the ninth "Festival of New Roman Song on Tour" and the university students involved in the conference "The Art of Living and Living on Art", organized by the Rui Foundation. I also greet you, dear citizens of Castel Gandolfo, who are celebrating the "Peach Festival". Thank you for the gift you gave me and I hope that your celebration will keep you deeply attached to the beautiful traditions of your land.
I cordially greet the French-speaking pilgrims who are participating in the Angelus, especially the women religious of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary from Lebanon and the young people from the chaplaincy of Valenciennes. May this day dedicated to God allow you to hear the Word of Christ and to be nourished with his Body, the source of life, in order to be missionaries of the Gospel! With my Apostolic Blessing.
I affectionately greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims, especially the group from the Work of the Church. I ask each of you to live your Christian vocation with devotion, so that the Word of God sown in your hearts may bear abundant fruit.
With regard to the wave of terrorism lashing Spain these days, which yesterday claimed a new victim, I wish to express my deep sorrow, as well as my solidarity and closeness to the victims' families.
Once again I renew my most vigorous condemnation of these acts against the right to freedom and to life, reaffirming that no idea, no social or political concept, can be imposed by violence. I ask the Lord that the Spanish people may always enjoy peaceful coexistence and social harmony.
I extend a cordial greeting to you, my German-speaking brothers and sisters. May the Lord strengthen you in faith and accompany you through the holidays. I gladly impart my Apostolic Blessing to all.
I would now like to extend a cordial greeting to the Italian members of the Cursillos de Cristiandad Movement gathered in the Paul VI Hall at the Vatican. Dear friends, may the Holy Spirit guide your activity in the field of evangelization wherever Providence has placed you, and bless your efforts, so valuable especially in our time, with abundant fruit.
I now greet the pilgrims from Poland: from St Paul's Parish in Ruda Slaska, from Most Holy Trinity Parish in Katowice, from the Salesian High School in Rumia, from St Elizabeth of Hungary Parish in Szczakowa, from Our Lady of Mount Carmel Parish in Dabrowa Tarnowska, and all the pilgrims from Bydgoszcz, Gdansk, Gdynia, Katowice, Opole and other cities.
I also wish to invite everyone to join spiritually in the prayer vigil for the feast of the Transfiguration, which, in response to the appeal of Patriarch Bartholomew I of Constantinople, will be held on Saturday evening, 5 August, in the Patriarchal Lateran Basilica, in order to give glory to God, who in Christ fully manifested himself when he said: "This is my beloved Son; listen to him" (Mt 17: 5).
Lastly, I entrust to the Lord those who are traveling on the last days of July, that they may drive carefully and safely reach their various holiday spots. Nor have I forgotten today the elderly, those who are alone and those forced to remain at home.
My Blessing to all.
   © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II 
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo, Sunday 23 July 2000
 
Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. Yesterday evening I returned from the Valle d'Aosta, where I was able to spend a few days of rest; the beauty of the mountains, valleys, woods and glaciers are still before my eyes. I want to thank the Lord again for this gift; I also thank those whose availability made this truly healthful break possible for me.
Now I am here among you once more, brothers and sisters of Castel Gandolfo, whom I am always pleased to see again. This Sunday gathering gives me the opportunity to extend a warm, hearfelt greeting to each of you, to Bishop Agostino Vallini and to his Auxiliary, Bishop Paolo Gillet, to the parish priest, to the mayor and to the holidaymakers and pilgrims. Thank you all for the kindness and affection with which you always welcome me here at Castel Gandolfo!
This year, because of my Jubilee commitments, my stay will have to be shorter than usual, and therefore I appreciate all the more these weeks which the Lord allows me to spend with you.
2. In the Gospel for today's liturgy, Jesus says to the Apostles, who have returned from a mission: "Come away by yourselves to a lonely place, and rest a while" (Mk 6: 31). Jesus and the disciples, tired from their ceaseless work among the people, felt the need every so often for a moment of calm. The Evangelist relates that, in fact, the crowds prevented them from having that desired "retreat" (cf. Mk 6: 33-24). But there is still value in rest and a need to use free time for healthy physical, and especially spiritual, relaxation.
In today's often frenetic and competive society, in which the logic of production and profit prevail, often at the expense of the individual, it is still necessary for everyone to be able to enjoy adequate periods of rest, in which to regain their energy and at the same time restore the right inner balance. Vacations, holidays, must be wisely used in order to benefit the individual and the family through contact with nature, tranquillity, the opportunity to foster greater family harmony, good reading and healthy recreational activities; above all, through the possibility of spending more time in prayer, in contemplation and in listening to God.

3. I wish everyone on holiday a good and beneficial vacation, entrusting to Mary, the our loving Mother, especially those who are particularly tired. I also entrust to the Blessed Virgin those who, for various reasons, are unable to leave their usual occupations and everyday surroundings. I assure everyone of a remembrance in my prayer.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father promised the support of his prayers for the Middle East peace negotiations under way at Camp David, USA, while once again stating the Holy See's position that "only a special, internationally guaranteed statute can effectively preserve the most sacred parts of the Holy City and ensure freedom of belief and worship for all believers". After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father promised the support of his prayers for the Middle East peace negotiations under way at Camp David, USA, while once again stating the Holy See's position that "only a special, internationally guaranteed statute can effectively preserve the most sacred parts of the Holy City and ensure freedom of belief and worship for all believers".
For several days, at Camp David in the United States of America, negotiations have been under way to reach an agreement that could contribute to the definitive establishment of peace in the Middle East.
For my part, I wish to accompany these certainly difficult negotiations with my prayer and encouragement, inviting those responsible to continue their efforts and hoping that they will always be motivated by the sincere desire to respect law and justice for all and to achieve a just and lasting peace.
At the same time, I would like to invite the parties involved not to overlook the importance of the spiritual dimension of the city of Jerusalem, with its Holy Places and the communities of the three monotheistic religions surrounding them.
The Holy See continues to maintain that only a special, internationally guaranteed statute can effectively preserve the most sacred parts of the Holy City and ensure freedom of belief and worship for all believers who, in the region and throughout the world, see Jerusalem as the crossroads of peace and coexistence.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims and visitors in various languages. To the English-speaking he said:
To the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors I extend a warm welcome, and hope that your holiday will be also a time of closeness to God. Upon you and your families I invoke the abundant blessings of the Lord.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 16 July 2000
 
1. I thank the Lord who this year has again offered me the opportunity to spend a period of rest in this stupendous mountain setting, which calls to mind the majestic presence of God. I thank the Bishop of Aosta, the President of the Council and Board of Valle d'Aosta and all the people of this region, which is dear to me, for their invitation and their welcome, as cordial as it is every year. I express my special gratitude to the Salesians, who always show me great hospitality, as well as to those who each day ensure that my collaborators and I will have a peaceful stay. Here, among the pleasant woods and valleys, the body is restored and the spirit can be more devoted to reflection and contemplation.
From this peaceful place, I would like to send a cordial greeting to those who are on holiday in these valleys and elsewhere, in the mountains or by the sea. I invite everyone to make these days of well-deserved summer rest a time of inner enrichment and worthwhile family relaxation. I am also thinking of those who cannot allow themselves a vacation and have stayed at home. I extend my affectionate greeting especially to the sick, the elderly, prisoners and those who are alone. I assure each one of a daily remembrance in my prayer.
2. As I look at these mountains, my thoughts turn today to Mount Carmel, praised in the Bible for its beauty. We are, in fact, celebrating the feast of Our Lady of Mount Carmel. On that mountain, located in Israel near Haifa, the holy prophet Elijah strenuously defended the integrity and purity of the chosen people's faith in the living God. On that same mountain some hermits gathered in the 12th century after Christ and dedicated themselves to contemplation and penance. The Carmelite Order arose from their spiritual experience.
Walking with the Blessed Virgin, the model of complete fidelity to the Lord, we will fear no obstacles or difficulties. Supported by her motherly intercession, like Elijah we will be able to fulfil our vocation as authentic "prophets" of the Gospel in our time.
3. Today's liturgy for the 15th Sunday in Ordinary Time urges us to make this ascetic and apostolic effort. It invites us to follow the example of the prophet Amos and the Apostles, who were chosen by the Lord to cooperate in his work of salvation.
May Our Lady of Mount Carmel, whom we call upon today with special devotion, help us tirelessly climb towards the summit of the mountain of holiness; may she help us love nothing more than Christ, who reveals to the world the mystery of divine love and true human dignity (cf.Opening Prayer).
 
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the faithful present in Italian, French and Spanish.
Today, the memorial of Our Lady of Mount Carmel, the presence of a group of Carmelite Sisters of St Teresa from Turin, who are holding their General Chapter, is particularly significant. In greeting you affectionately, dear sisters, I would also like to extend a cordial wish to all Carmelite men and women, as well as to the associations inspired by this charism. I invoke constant divine assistance on the entire Carmelite family, as I urge all its members to seek and love God, who first loved us, above all things and to strive in every circumstance to foster the values of the contemplative life, from which love of neighbour flows and is urged on for the salvation of the world and the building up of the Church.
I also greet the Swiss Benedictine monks who have wished to pay me a visit. Dear friends, may St Benedict, whose feast we celebrated a few days ago, help you and the entire Benedictine family to be faithful to the teaching he set down in the Book of the Rule.
I next greet the Alpine guides of Courmayeur, the Mountain Milk Producers' Associations of the Arco Alpino regions who are celebrating their Jubilee, the faithful from the parish of Giussano, the group of sculptors who have carved this artistic cross, the artist who created the work depicting St Laurence, which I will shortly bless, and "Les Enfants du Paradis" Children's Choir.
Dear French-speaking pilgrims who have joined the Marian prayer of the Angelus, I cordially greet you. In particular, I extend my greetings and thanks to you, the authorities and inhabitants of the Valle d'Aosta, who welcome me to your beautiful region where contemplation of the mountain peaks invites us to lift our eyes to the Lord, Creator of heaven and earth. On this first day of the week, I ask the Holy Spirit to fill your hearts with the gift of wonder at the beauties of creation, which lead us to discover the divine mysteries. May God bless you and keep you!
On this Sunday when we also recall Our Lady of Mount Carmel, I am pleased to greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims who are taking part in this Marian prayer. I cordially bless you all and your families. Thank you very much for coming.
Dear brothers and sisters, I thank you all for your heartfelt participation and cordially bless you.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday 9 July 2000
Jubilee in Prisons
Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. This morning I had the joy of meeting the inmates of "Regina Caeli" Prison for the celebration of the Great Jubilee. It was a touching moment of prayer and humanity. Looking into their eyes, I tried to glimpse the sufferings, anxieties and hopes of each one. I knew that in them I was meeting Christ, who identified with them in the Gospel to the point of saying: "I was in prison and you came to me" (Mt 25: 36).
Precisely with their hard situation in mind, I asked in my Message for the Jubilee in Prisons that on the occasion of the Holy Year they would be offered a gesture of clemency. I especially asked lawmakers throughout the world to rethink the prison system and the penal system itself, in order to make it more respectful of human dignity in accord with a justice that redeems the offender and not only repairs the disorder caused by crime. Those who have made mistakes must be helped to begin a process of moral redemption and personal and community growth for their effective return to society.
2. Today in Baltimore the Joint International Commission for the Theological Dialogue between the Catholic Church and the Orthodox Churches is meeting in plenary session to study, on the threshold of the third millennium, several topics regarding the future of our mutual relations.
I invite everyone to pray to the Lord that he will instil in hearts the gifts of his Spirit, so that this meeting can foster an ever greater understanding between Catholics and Orthodox and thus contribute to further progress towards the desired goal of full ecclesial communion.
3. I feel obliged, now, to mention the well-known demonstrations held in Rome in the past few days.
In the name of the Church of Rome I can only express my deep sadness at the affront to the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000 and the offence to the Christian values of a city that is so dear to the hearts of Catholics throughout the world.
The Church cannot be silent about the truth, because she would fail in her fidelity to God the Creator and would not help to distinguish good from evil.
In this regard, I wish merely to read what is said in the Catechism of the Catholic Church, which, after noting that homosexual acts are contrary to the natural law, then states: "The number of men and women who have deep-seated homosexual tendencies is not negligible. This inclination, which is objectively disordered, constitutes for most of them a trial. They must be accepted with respect, compassion and sensitivity. Every sign of unjust discrimination in their regard should be avoided.
These persons are called to fulfil God's will in their lives and, if they are Christians, to unite to the sacrifice of the Lord's Cross the difficulties they may encounter from their condition" (CCC, n. 2358).
May the heavenly Mother assist us with her protection.
After leading the Angelus and giving his Blessing, the Holy Father greeted Italian and Mexican pilgrim groups and then said:
Tomorrow, God willing, I will go to the mountains of Valle d'Aosta for a time of rest. I would like to greet those who are already at various holiday spots and those who are still in town. In a special way I offer my best wishes to the young people taking examinations at the end of the school year.
I also greet those who cannot go on holiday. I am thinking of the sick, those alone and all who are obliged to remain at home for various reasons. May they receive our solidarity.
I promise to remember you all and give you a special Blessing.
 © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday 2 July 2000
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. Last Friday we celebrated the Solemnity of the Sacred Heart of Jesus, that Heart which began to beat 2,000 years ago in the womb of Mary Most Holy and brought the fire of God's love into the world.
The Heart of Jesus contains a message for everyone; it also speaks to today's world. In a society where technology and informatics are developing at a growing rate, where people are caught up in thousands of often conflicting interests, they risk losing their centre, the centre of their very selves. By showing us his Heart, Jesus reminds us first of all that it is there, deep within himself, that each person's destiny is decided, his death or life in the definitive sense. He himself gives us life in abundance, which allows our hearts, sometimes hardened by indifference and selfishness, to be opened to a higher form of life.
The Heart of the crucified and risen Christ is the inexhaustible source of grace from which every individual can always draw love, truth and mercy, especially during this special year of the Great Jubilee.
2. The Blood of Christ has redeemed us. This is the truth which we proclaimed just yesterday, at the beginning of July, the month traditionally dedicated to the Precious Blood of Christ, at the Jubilee of the Sanguis Christi Union.
How much blood has been unjustly shed in the world! How much violence, how much contempt for human life!
This humanity, often wounded by hatred and violence, more than ever needs to experience the efficacy of Christ's redeeming Blood. That Blood, which was not shed in vain, contains all the power of God's love and is the pledge of hope, redemption and reconciliation. But in order to draw from this source, we must turn to the Cross of Christ and fix our gaze on the Son of God, on his pierced Heart, on that Blood poured out.
3. Mary stood beneath the Cross, sharing in the Passion of her Son. She offers her Mother's Heart as a refuge to everyone in search of forgiveness, hope and peace, as we have been reminded by the feast of her Immaculate Heart. Mary washed the blood from her crucified Son. We entrust to her the blood of the victims of violence, so that it may be redeemed by the Blood which Jesus shed for the world's salvation.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father expressed his sorrow at the loss of life caused by the sinking of a ferry in the Molucca Islands.
At this moment I have learned with great sorrow that the ferry which disappeared three days ago in Indonesia's Molucca Islands unfortunately sank with about 500 passengers on board. I express my heartfelt grief for the victims, as I pray the Lord to grant them their eternal reward and, with all my strength, I implore peace and security for those islands tormented by violence.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Thursday 29 June 2000
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. Today the People of God, particularly the city and the Diocese of Rome, are celebrating the Solemnity of the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul, considered the pillars of the universal Church. Peter, the "rock" on which Christ founded his Church; Paul, the "chosen instrument" to bring the Gospel to the nations. The fisherman from Galilee who, having overcome the trial of the dark days of his Lord's passion, would strengthen his brothers in faith and shepherd Christ's flock; the zealous Pharisee, who, having been converted on the road to Damascus, would become the herald of the salvation that comes from faith.
A mysterious design of Providence brought them both to Rome, to seal their witness with blood: Peter was crucified, Paul beheaded. One was buried at the foot of the Vatican Hill, the other on the Via Ostiensis.
2. As we do every year, on this solemn occasion we have the honour and glory of welcoming a Delegation from the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople, which is joining us to celebrate the Princes of the Apostles. I extend my cordial greeting and a fraternal embrace of peace in the Lord to each member of the Delegation.
The significant presence of these Brothers in faith is a gesture that invites us to hope and to continue, without ever being discouraged, on the path of ecumenical dialogue. We pray to the Lord that the Christians of East and West can experience as soon as possible the joy and grace of the full unity and unanimous communion of faith and apostolic commitment.
I also invite you, dear pilgrims who have come from every corner of the earth for the Great Jubilee, to pray for this special intention at the tombs of the Apostles. To you I entrust the two intentions that are particularly close to my heart at the beginning of the third millennium: Christian unity and the new evangelization.
3. May St Peter intercede for us, so that the ministry of his Successor may be recognized and accepted by all as a service to the unity of God's People. Let us ask St Paul to support the Church's missionary work, especially for those who have not yet received the Good News of Christ the Saviour.
Lastly, let us turn our hearts to Mary Most Holy, whom we invoke today as the Queen of Apostles and the Salus Populi Romani - the salvation of the Roman people. And I would like to extend a very special greeting to you, dear brothers and sisters of the Diocese of Rome. Let us pray that Sts Peter and Paul will strengthen our faith and help us to bear witness to it in every setting and circumstance.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father called for stronger international cooperation on behalf of the world's most disadvantaged peoples, following the release of a special United Nations report on human rights and human development.
A special United Nations report on human rights and human development is being released today throughout the world.
The struggle against poverty is one of the greatest challenges that humanity faces in the new millennium. Essential food, health care, education and work are not only the goals of development: they are fundamental rights which are still denied to millions of human beings.
Human rights and human development must go forward together, but stronger international cooperation is needed on behalf of the most disadvantaged peoples.
I ardently hope that one of the fruits of this Great Jubilee will be a new, concrete commitment to international solidarity.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday 25 June 2000
Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. This evening the International Eucharistic Congress, which for the past week has made Rome the city of the Eucharist, will close with the solemn celebration of the Statio Orbis in St Peter's Square.
In basilicas and parishes, in monasteries and many other places of worship, there have been numerous liturgical celebrations, but also moments of adoration, and a great number of people have paused to pray before the presence of Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar. We can say that the entire Church, in a sense, has gathered here in Rome to remain in the Upper Room, listening and contemplating the Eucharist.
2. Christ is the Bread of salvation for man, a wayfarer and pilgrim on earth. This is why on the feast of Corpus Christi the Eucharist is carried in procession through the streets, among the homes and buildings of daily life. In the Eucharistic mystery the Risen One, in fact, has wished to continue dwelling in our midst, so that every human being can know his true name, his true face, and experience his boundless mercy.
We firmly believe that Christ is the only Saviour of the world. He is the Mediator of the new and eternal Covenant (cf. Heb 9: 15), which fulfilled the Covenant God made on Sinai with the chosen people. It is a Covenant open to all peoples, in view of the great eschatological banquet foretold by the prophets of Israel. In the light of this truth, the Church does not scorn what human beings do in their various religious expressions to approach God and to be purified by him; instead she encourages fruitful interreligious dialogue. At the same time, however, she cannot fail to state clearly that Christ is the only Redeemer, the Son of God, who became incarnate for us, died and rose again.
3. In the mystery of the Eucharist Christ wished to remain with us by becoming our saving food and drink. The theme of the International Eucharistic Congress stresses this well: Jesus Christ, the only Saviour of the world, Bread for new life.
Let us entrust to Mary Most Holy the fruits borne during these days of reflection and prayer. From this moment we also entrust to her the next International Eucharistic Congress, which, God willing, will be celebrated in 2004 in Guadalajara, Mexico. May Mary, who lived in intimate and constant communion with Jesus, the Word made flesh, help every Christian to recognize in the Eucharist the living presence of her divine Son, to receive him with faith and to call upon him with love.
Invigorated by the Eucharistic Bread, no Christian will hesitate to serve his brothers and sisters, in order to build a new, more just and fraternal humanity.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS

Sunday 18 June 2000
Solemnity of the Holy Trinity
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. We have reached the heart of the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000. In the days ahead we will observe several of its peak moments with the liturgy. They disclose the profound meaning of the Jubilee event. In the space of a week we are celebrating two solemnities - the Holy Trinity and Corpus Christi - that fully manifest the nature of this Holy Year, which is both Trinitarian and Eucharistic.
Prepared by three years of reflection on Christ, the Spirit and the Father, the Jubilee's aim is to give thanks and praise to the divine Trinity, from whom everything in the world and in history comes and to whom everything returns (cf. Tertio millennio adveniente, n. 55).
But there is only one "way", one "door" to the mystery of God's Love: Jesus, who was born, died and rose again to give life to every person. Before dying on the Cross as a victim of expiation for our sins, he left to the Church the memorial of his redeeming sacrifice: the sacrament of the Eucharist. Therefore, the Year 2000 cannot fail to be "intensely Eucharistic" (ibid.), and Rome is thus hosting the International Eucharistic Congress, which will begin precisely this evening.
2. "In the sacrament of the Eucharist the Saviour, who took flesh in Mary's womb 20 centuries ago, continues to offer himself to humanity as the source of divine life" (ibid.). This is the sense of the theme chosen for the Eucharistic Congress of the Year 2000: "Jesus Christ, the Only Saviour of the World, Bread for New Life".
This evening I will solemnly open the Congress with the celebration of Vespers in St Peter's Square. The week will be filled with moments of prayer, art and celebration. Among the many events, I mention in particular the conference on "The Eucharist and the Face of Christ" and the Jubilee of Italian catechists.
Next Thursday we will celebrate the Solemnity of the Body and Blood of the Lord: from the Basilica of St John Lateran the traditional Eucharistic procession will make its way to St Mary Major. On Sunday evening St Peter's Square will host the great concluding celebration, called the "Statio Orbis", as if to indicate that humanity pauses before the greatest of marvels: the God who becomes food, under the appearances of bread and wine, to feed the whole world.
3. Where his senses and reason cannot reach, it is faith that supports man in approaching this mystery. The creature who is the greatest teacher of faith is Mary Most Holy. Before the abyss of God's Love, she teaches us trusting abandonment; before her crucified and risen Son, she invites us to be in communion with him.
May Mary guide us, then, so that we can fully and fruitfully live these days of grace.
After reciting the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the various pilgrims and visitors in St Peter's Square. To the English-speaking he said: 
I extend a warm welcome to the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors, in particular to the group from Holy Family Academy in Manassas, Virginia. Upon all of you I invoke the abundant gifts of the Holy Spirit.
© Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA COELI
Sunday 11 June 2000
Pentecost
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. This Sunday we are celebrating the Solemnity of Pentecost. During the Holy Mass at which I had the joy of presiding yesterday evening St Peter's Square became like an "upper room" in the heart of Rome. An upper room spiritually linked to the one in Jerusalem where the first miraculous outpouring of the Holy Spirit on the Apostles and Mary Most Holy took place almost 2,000 years ago.
On that day the one, holy, catholic and apostolic Church was born. One, because the Spirit made the Church a mystery of communion, an icon on earth of the Most Holy Trinity; holy, because the Spirit preserves in her members the holiness of Christ the Head; catholic, because the Spirit spurs her to proclaim the one Gospel of salvation to all peoples; apostolic, because through the ministry of the Apostles and their successors the Spirit guides her on the paths of history.
2. In the light of today's feast, this Jubilee Day dedicated to reflection on the duties of Catholics towards others:  proclamation of Christ, witness and dialogue becomes extraordinarily significant. Promoted by the Pontifical Council for Interreligious Dialogue, it invites every baptized person and every ecclesial community to meditate on how to be more and more committed to proclaiming and bearing witness to Christ to all, while respecting their different religious affiliations.
It is very important to work together with every man and woman of good will to build a more just and fraternal world.
Only in Christ can this project of authentic spiritual and social renewal be achieved. This is why, also as part of the Jubilee, the International Eucharistic Congress will be held here in Rome next Sunday. Its events will include the traditional Corpus Christi procession on Thursday, the 22nd, and the solemn concluding celebration, called "Statio Orbis", on the evening of Sunday, the 25th. Jesus, who was born of the Virgin Mary by the power of the Holy Spirit 2,000 years ago, remains among us in the sacrament of the Eucharist, the living Bread come down from heaven, the Bread of our journey and hope.
3. In these days a meeting of historic importance will begin between the leaders of North and South Korea in Pyongyang, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. I join all men and women of good will in congratulating the two countries' leaders for this initiative, and hope that the dialogue and exchanges will contribute to the reconciliation of the two populations, the reunion of families separated for half a century and renewed stability and prosperity throughout the Korean peninsula. Only by generous commitment to the common good will it be possible to overcome the difficulties and achieve a positive result, which will be a cause of joyful hope for humanity.
  After praying the Regina Caeli, the Holy Father said:
On the occasion of Pentecost, Expo Missionaria 2000, an important exhibition on the mission world, opened yesterday in Rome at the Abbey of Tre Fontane and will continue until the end of the Jubilee. I greet and bless the organizers and missionaries present here, and am certain that, by visiting this exhibition, pilgrims will have a better understanding of how faith in Jesus Christ is proclaimed and witnessed to always and everywhere.
After the Regina Caeli, the Holy Father appealed for peace in Africa, especially in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where violent clashes continue:
My thoughts now turn to Africa. Once again Africa's heart is bleeding!
In recent days the population of the city of Kisangani, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, has been taken hostage by the violence of armed factions fighting one another. Nor have the Church's institutions been spared. There are hundreds of dead and wounded.
I appeal to the responsibility and sensitivity of the political and military authorities, and pray that God will make them hear the voice of conscience:  Africa, and in particular the Democratic Republic of the Congo, need reconciliation and peace.
May Mary Most Holy, Queen of Peace, intercede for us.
© Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA COELI
Sunday 4 June 2000
World Day of Social Communications
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. Today the feast of Jesus' Ascension into heaven is being celebrated in many countries, including Italy. Forty days after his Resurrection, he was lifted up before his disciples' eyes and a cloud took him from their sight (cf. Acts 1: 9). Jesus' public life ended in this way and the Church's missionary expansion began. From that day, Christ's disciples started to spread the Word of salvation everywhere, bearing witness to the Death and Resurrection of their divine Master.
Today the Church continues on this path, proclaiming the Gospel to the people of our time and telling everyone that our true, definitive homeland is not here below but "in the heavens", that is, in God.
However, this must not deter us from our involvement in the world, instead - as the lives of the saints show - it must strengthen it even more. Only by completing our mission on earth will we finally be able to enter into God's glory.
2. To proclaim and bear witness to Christ! This is the mission of every baptized person. This mission is referred to directly by the World Day of Social Communications, which is being celebrated today and whose theme is:  "Proclaiming Christ in the media at the dawn of the new millennium". Communications are certainly one of the most extensive areas of society; therefore the work of media professionals is very important. It was precisely to underscore this importance, which represents a pastoral priority for the Church, that the decision was made to celebrate the Jubilee of Journalists on this occasion, and I myself will shortly have the joy of meeting them.
The Ecclesial Community, conscious of the mandate it has received from Christ to "communicate" the Gospel, uses every means for this task, including the most modern. Journalists, media professionals and all who work in this sector in various ways are asked to carry out their mission responsibly, knowing that when one works with respect for the truth, a valuable service is rendered to the truth itself, and so also to the human person. I gladly express my grateful encouragement to journalists and to everyone working in the information field who, in every part of the world, dedicate themselves to the good of man by serving justice, freedom and peace, frequently at the cost of personal sacrifice.
3. May the Spirit of God help everyone who is seeking and serving the truth. May he help and guide the Church so that she can enter the new millennium filled with the light and strength of Christ.
Let us entrust this prayer to Mary. Together with her, in this week that prepares us for the feast of Pentecost, let us relive the prayerful waiting of the Apostles in the Upper Room.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA COELI
Sunday, 28 May 2000
Jubilee of the Diocese of Rome
Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. At the end of this solemn celebration, we turn to Blessed Mary and entrust to her the fruits of the Jubilee of the Diocese of Rome. We ask her, Salvation of the Roman People, that everyone who lives in Rome may nurture a strong faith and a sincere love for Jesus, the only Saviour of the world. We ask her, Our Lady of Divine Love, that Christian spouses may be faithful to the grace of Marriage and that families may grow in unity and openness to life. To her, Our Lady of Trust, we entrust the young people of Rome, so that they may joyfully discover that life is a vocation and is fulfilled through giving oneself to God and to one's brothers and sisters.
2. I also call upon Mary Most Holy for her help in the forthcoming Jubilee events: the Jubilee of Migrants and Itinerant People, which will be held from Thursday, 1 June, to Saturday, 3 June, and the Jubilee of Journalists on Sunday, 4 June, which will give me the opportunity to meet many people who work in this important field.
Looking a little ahead, I would like to recall the International Eucharistic Congress, which will begin on 18 June and close on 25 June with a great evening celebration in this square. I now invite Romans to take part in large numbers, with the particular hope of seeing the many boys and girls who will make their First Communion.
3. To Our Lady I entrust you, the pilgrims present here, and especially the participants in the Italian Red Cross assembly, whom I encourage in their efforts on behalf of the weakest and most forgotten. I also greet the children who have started the ·March of the Angelsº in Deruta, near Perugia. The month of May is drawing to a close and will end on the 31st with the liturgical feast of the Visitation, which recalls Mary's visit to her cousin Elizabeth. On that day there will be Marian celebrations more or less everywhere, and the now traditional evening procession to the Lourdes Grotto will also be held in the Vatican.
At Lourdes, as at Fátima, the Mother of God addressed the same message to mankind: prayer and penance, a direct echo of the Gospel exhortation: watch and pray! Only in this way will peace triumph in hearts: between individuals and among peoples. Let us all, adults, young people, children and the elderly, answer the heavenly Mother's call, so that the fruits of the Great Jubilee will be multiplied in Rome and in every part of the world.
The Holy Father greeted pilgrims from Poland and Ukraine and then said extemporaneously:
I thank everyone, the Cardinal Vicar, the Auxiliary Bishops, the priests and all the faithful of the Diocese of Rome. Thank you for coming in such large numbers. Thank you for the gift you have given me. Thank you for your presence.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA COELI

Sunday, 21 May 2000
  1. At this moment my heart turns to the hill of Tepeyac. Before the tilma with the image of the Mother of God so greatly revered by all the peoples of America, I implore her motherly protection upon the Church. As I once again greet all the Mexican pilgrims with great affection, I encourage you to remember the example of these new saints. Through their intercession may Mexico always remain faithful, and on her soil may Christians of the stature of these canonized saints and of other great children of the Church in this land continue to increase.
2. At the end of this solemn celebration, our thoughts and prayers turn to the Queen of Heaven in a spirit of gratitude for her motherly assistance in accompanying the new saints on their way to Christian perfection. As children of the Church in Mexico, they always loved Our Lady and called upon her, especially under the beautiful title of Our Lady of Guadalupe. To her, the Star of Evangelization on the American continent, we entrust one of the fundamental goals of the Great Jubilee:  that of "inspiring in all the faithful a true longing for holiness" (Tertio millennio adveniente, n. 42).
3. Next Sunday, at 10.00 in this Square, I will have the joy of celebrating the Jubilee for this beloved Diocese of Rome, whose guidance the Lord entrusted to me 22 years ago.
Let us pray for the grace and blessings of the Lord upon both the Church and the city of Rome, so that this Holy Year, carefully prepared with the Diocesan Synod and the City Mission, may be an event of faith and conversion for Romans, and bear good fruits for themselves and their families, as well as for the whole life of this beloved city.
As I invite all the People of God to take part, I entrust this great Jubilee event to the intercession of Mary, Salus Populi Romani.
© Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA COELI

Sunday, 14 May 2000
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. My heart is still filled with the emotion I felt yesterday, when I beatified the little shepherds, Francisco and Jacinta Marto, who, together with Lucia who is still alive, had the privilege of seeing and speaking with Our Lady.
I entrusted all the Church's needs and intentions to Our Lady and also prayed for vocations. Today, in fact, we are celebrating the World Day of Prayer for Vocations: we raise a unanimous and confident entreaty to God, the Lord of the harvest, to send many holy workers into his harvest (cf. Mt 9: 38). Following a significant custom, on this Fourth Sunday of Easter, commonly known as "Good Shepherd Sunday", I am pleased to have been able to ordain new priests for the Diocese of Rome. I greet them again and invite everyone to thank God for the gift of these Gospel ministers.
Let us pray for them so that they will always be living images of Christ the Good Shepherd among the Christian people. May their life and ministry be a joyful witness to Christ and his Gospel.
2. Dear brothers and sisters, during this month of May, which popular tradition dedicates to Mary, let us constantly turn our hearts and minds to her and imitate her example of faithful fidelity to the divine plan.
Accepting the invitation that the Blessed Virgin made to believers precisely at Fátima, let us pray and do penance for the Church, for the sanctification of priests, for the conversion of all who live in sin and for peace in the world.
3. I now extend a special greeting to the representatives of the National Association of Haemodialysis Patients, who have gathered here on the "Day for Organ Donations and Transplants". To the sick, to their relatives and to all who assist them, my greetings and heartfelt encouragement.
I now greet all the pilgrims, especially the parish groups from Mathi (Archdiocese of Turin), Bozzano and Viareggio, L'Aquila, Longi (Diocese of Patti), Socco and Bulgorello (Diocese of Como), and Arzano di Napoli, as well as the scout group from Agropoli and the group of horsemen who have come on pilgrimage from Siena.
May your visit to the tomb of Peter strengthen your faith and Gospel witness.
© Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana/font>
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA COELI

Sunday, 7 May 2000
    Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. This evening at the Colosseum an important event of the Great Jubilee will take place: the Ecumenical Commemoration of Witnesses to the Faith in the 20th Century.
The century just ended was marked by dark shadows, but bright lights shone in the midst of them. They are the many men and women, Christians of every denomination, race and age who witnessed to the faith during harsh persecutions, in prison, amid privations of every kind, and many also shed their blood to remain faithful to Christ, to the Church and to the Gospel.
The light of Easter itself shines brightly in them: indeed, it is from Christ's Resurrection that the disciples receive the strength to follow the Master in times of trial. This is why the commemoration is taking place in the liturgical season of Easter, whose third Sunday occurs today. And the place chosen speaks for itself: the Colosseum takes us back to the origins of Christianity, when so many early Christians bore their "beautiful witness" and became the seed of new believers.
2. Remembering the heroic witnesses to the faith in the 20th century means preparing the future and assuring it solid reasons for hope. The new generations must know the cost of the faith they have inherited, if they are to receive the torch of the Gospel with gratitude and shed its light on the new century and the new millennium.
It is also important to stress that this evening's celebration will have an ecumenical character: the testimonies of a number of Christians of various Confessions and Ecclesial Communities will be proclaimed. Their courage in taking the Cross of Christ upon themselves speaks louder than the things which divide us: the ecumenism of the martyrs is perhaps the most convincing (cf. Tertio millennio adveniente, n. 37). Love to the point of sacrifice purifies the Churches from all that can hinder or delay the journey towards full unity.
3. Among the lights of Christ's heroic disciples that of Mary, the faithful Virgin, martyr at the foot of the Cross, shines with singular brightness. From the fiat in Nazareth to the one on Calvary, her whole life was patterned by the Holy Spirit on that of her Son in bearing witness to God the Father and to his merciful love.
In the first community of Jerusalem Mary represented the living memory of Jesus, of his Incarnation, Passion, Death and Resurrection. When put to the test, every believer and every Christian community find support and comfort in the Blessed Virgin. To you, Mother of Hope, we entrust this day, so that the memory of these witnesses to the faith can help all Christians to walk with greater determination towards the full unity desired by Christ.
After leading the recitation of the Regina Caeli, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims in German and Italian.
I extend a cordial welcome to the German-speaking pilgrims. I first welcome the pilgrims from the Diocese of Magdeburg, accompanied by their Bishop Leopold Nowak. May the Lord strengthen you on your faith journey in an environment where many people live as though God did not exist. I wish you great strength and courage!
I affectionately greet the faithful from the Diocese of Orvieto-Todi, led by Bishop Decio Lucio Grandoni and their priests. In particular, I congratulate the middle-school children from Acquasparta who have come here on foot with some of their teachers. The Lord bless you!
I thank the many bands from the Province of Rome for their lively concert on the occasion of the Jubilee. I think that St Peter's Square has seldom held so many bands at one time! I extend my best wishes to the musicians, the organizers and their families.
I greet the Italian seminarians who are taking part in the meeting of the Pontifical Mission Societies, as well as the movement, "Long Live the Elderly", of the Sant'Egidio Community, and the pilgrims who have come by bicycle from Treviso.
My thoughts now turn to the many participants in the Jubilee pilgrimage of the Archdiocese of Turin; to the parish groups from Gela and Montegranaro; to the children and their parents from St John Chrysostom Parish in Rome; to the young people confirmed and soon to be confirmed from Valenzano; to the scout group from Atessa (Chieti); and to the children of the De Pino Institute of Maratea, accompanied by the Daughters of Our Lady on Mount Calvary.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA COELI

Sunday, 30 April 2000
  1. At the close of this celebration, in which our Easter joy is combined with that of Sr Faustina Kowalska's canonization, I affectionately greet and thank all of you who have come from various parts of the world. I ardently hope that each of you can experience what Our Lady one day assured St Faustina:  "I am not only the Queen of Heaven, but also the Mother of Mercy and your Mother" (Diary, 141).
2. The message of Divine Mercy and the image of the merciful Christ of which Sr Faustina Kowalska speaks to us today are a vivid expression of the spirit of the Great Jubilee which the whole Church is celebrating with joy and fruitfulness. Many of you have come to honour the new saint. May her intercession bring abundant gifts of repentance, forgiveness and renewed spiritual vitality to the Church in your countries. May the thought of God's loving kindness stir up in your hearts new energies for works of faith and Christian solidarity.
I cordially greet the French-speaking pilgrims, especially those who have taken part in the canonization of Sr Faustina. Following her example, may you entrust yourselves totally to the Lord and praise him in the power of his mercy! May the renewing strength of the risen Christ fill your hearts!
At the same time my thoughts embrace all my compatriots and I entrust them to the intercession of the saintly Sr Faustina. In the new millennium may the message of the merciful love of God, who bends over all human poverty, be an endless source of hope for everyone and a call to show active love to one's brothers and sisters. I cordially bless you all.
Today we also join the Primate, Archbishop of Gniezno, and all our compatriots who have gathered in Gniezno for the solemnity of St Adalbert.
"Gaude Mater Poloniae...". Rejoice, Mother of Poland; rejoice, Sisters of Our Lady of Mercy, because our Sr Faustina has been raised to the glory of the saints.
I cordially greet the pilgrims from Poland and all those devoted to the Divine Mercy who have gathered at the shrine in Kraków-Lagiewniki. I am happy that on this day - so special for our country - representatives of the Government of the Republic of Poland are here with the Prime Minister, as well as representatives of Solidarnosc.
Divine Providence has linked Sr Faustina's life with the cities of Warsaw, Plock, Vilnius and Kraków. Today I recall the names of these cities, of which the new saint is the patroness, entrusting to their residents a particular concern for the Divine Mercy apostolate.
3. And now let us pray to the merciful Queen of Heaven.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA COELI
Easter Monday, 24 April 2000
  1. Our hearts are still filled with Easter joy on this Monday of the Octave of Easter, known as "Monday of the Angel". After the Lenten season, which was a particularly intense experience for the Church in this Jubilee Year, after the deep emotions of the Sacred Triduum, today too we pause in meditation before the empty tomb, drawn there by the radiant mystery of the Resurrection of the Lord.
Life conquered death. We need faith if we are to open ourselves to this new and marvellous outlook. Let us allow ourselves to be penetrated by the thoughts and emotions that pulsate in the Easter sequence: "Yes ... Christ indeed from death is risen". This truth marked the life of the Apostles who, after the Resurrection, felt the desire to follow their Teacher rekindled in their hearts and, after receiving the Holy Spirit, left without delay to proclaim to everyone what they had personally seen and experienced.
2. Dear brothers and sisters, once again we have heard the comforting announcement of the Resurrection: "Christ my hope is arisen". If Christ is risen we can look with new eyes and hearts at every event in our life. This is the Easter message I would like to convey to all the people of the world.
These are also my Easter wishes, which I renew to you all affectionately on this day, when the liturgy reminds us of the angel's words to the three women weeping at the empty tomb. As the Gospel recalls, they went early in the morning to the tomb and there received from a "young man ... dressed in a white robe" the news that changed the course of history: "Do not be amazed; you seek Jesus of Nazareth, who was crucified. He has risen, he is not here" (cf. Mk 16: 6).
3. He has risen. This is the heart of our faith. Mary was a silent witness of all these events. Let us ask her to help us also to receive the fullness of this Easter message.
"Regina caeli, laetare, alleluia - Rejoice, Queen of heaven, alleluia!".
This is the prayer that replaces the Angelus, which we address to her throughout the Easter season. The joy of the Blessed Virgin contains in itself everything for which the Church rejoices: every good of grace and nature. Let us therefore call upon her with faith and devotion: Regina caeli laetare, alleluia!
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS  
16 April 2000
Palm Sunday
  1. Before concluding this celebration, I extend a warm greeting to all the young people present. Dear friends, next August Rome will host the great meeting for young people from around the world. I thank all of you, young Romans and Italians, for the commitment and availability with which you are preparing to welcome your peers. A cordial "thank you" also goes to the Puglia Region, which offered the olive plants and branches for today's feast.
2. I cordially greet the French-speaking youth present at this Palm Sunday liturgy. I am making an appointment in Rome with all young people for the 15th World Youth Day, and I invite them to come in large numbers to this great ecclesial meeting in the heart of the Jubilee.
I warmly welcome the English-speaking young people and pray that this Holy Week and Easter will be for all of you a time of prayerful closeness to Christ and of renewed commitment to the Church's mission. The new evangelization needs your energies and enthusiasm! God bless you all!
Dear young people from German-speaking countries, I am delighted at your presence. We have entered Holy Week with Jesus and have sung "Hosanna". May this cry be tempered by the Cross and lead to the joyful song of "Alleluia".
I greet the Spanish-speaking young people. Today you have joyfully accompanied Jesus as he entered Jerusalem. Also receive him with joy when he knocks at your door. I invite you to World Youth Day next August in Rome and bless you all with affection.
I affectionately greet the young people from Portugal and Brazil, wishing them all a Happy Easter in union with the Risen One, in the hope of meeting them again for this year's World Youth Day.
I cordially greet the Polish young people present in St Peter's Square. I thank you for taking part in today's Palm Sunday liturgy, as I also thank everyone who participated through radio and television. I invite all of them to World Youth Day, which will take place next August. Young Poles will certainly not disappoint us and many will come to Rome. God bless everyone!
3. I entrust all of you, dear young people, to Mary most holy, and once again I give you the Angelus prayer as I did in the Message I addressed to you. Meditate on it each day in order to become, after the example of the Virgin of Nazareth, authentic disciples of Jesus and witnesses to his Gospel.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS

Sunday, 9 April 2000

1. At the end of this celebration, I would once again like to greet and thank everyone who has come to pay homage to the five new blesseds, one of whom is an Italian, Bl. Anna Rosa Gattorno. I hope that the religious of the institute she founded and all who share our rejoicing today will draw abundant fruit from the spiritual heritage left us by this faithful disciple of the Lord, who was always ready to serve her poor and suffering brothers and sisters.
2. I extend a special greeting to the pilgrims present for the beatification of Mary Elisabeth Hesselblad, Francis Xavier Seelos and Mariam Thresia Mankidiyan, especially those from Sweden, Germany, the United States and India. Through the intercession of the new beati, may you be strengthened in your faith and in Christian living.
I also extend a cordial greeting to the German-speaking pilgrims. Bl. Francis Xavier Seelos was born at Füssen in the Allgäu and was educated by the Benedictines in Augsburg. Swabia was thus the native soil of his faith. May the new blessed also encourage you to risk the adventure of faith.
3. With great affection I now address the Colombian pilgrims who have come for the beatification of Fr Mariano de Jesús Euse Hoyos. I greet the Cardinals, Bishops and priests who have accompanied the large pilgrimage. Through Fr Marianito's intercession may Colombians see their right to peace respected, the basis on which the development of all other rights depends. May God bless Colombia with peace!
4. As we thank the Lord for these generous Gospel witnesses, I would like to add a few words about two initiatives of solidarity. The first is the World Campaign for Elementary Instruction, a good that millions of children unfortunately still lack. I hope that the international community's efforts will soon achieve the goal of providing basic education for all minors. Secondly, I join the appeal of the Italian health authorities for blood donations and hope that people's commitment to such a human and evangelical way of helping our neighbour in need will be more and more generous.
May Mary, Queen of All Saints, guide and support us all on our Lenten journey to Easter, which is now close.
© Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 2 April 2000
Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. "Laetare Ierusalem" - Rejoice Jerusalem (cf. Is 66: 10).
This is the invitation that rings out at the beginning of Mass this Sunday, traditionally known as "Laetare Sunday" for this reason. We are now halfway through Lent and the invitation to rejoice encourages us to continue our penitential journey to Easter without halting. Lent is like a pilgrimage, where the effort of the journey does not lessen, but rather increases the happiness of approaching our destination.
"Rejoice Jerusalem...". I too have experienced in recent days the joy of being a pilgrim from Rome to the Holy Land, building a bridge between the two focal points of the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000, Rome and Jerusalem. This grace fills my heart with deep spiritual joy, and I constantly thank the Lord for it. I am also grateful to everyone who accompanied me in prayer. At those moments, at those places, I felt the whole Church present with me.
2. "Rejoice with her, you who mourned for her". The joy which the liturgy speaks of on this Fourth Sunday of Lent stems from an awareness of the mystery of love which lies ahead of us and which today is re-echoed in the words of John's Gospel: "God so loved the world that he gave his only Son, that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life" (Jn 3: 16). How can we not be drawn by this love? God does not want the sinner to die, but to turn from his way and live. In order to live, man must turn to him, forsake the ways that degrade his dignity and return to his Father's house.
This is the meaning of the Jubilee, which in this Lenten season has entered its most intense phase. This can be clearly seen in Rome: the Holy Doors of the four major basilicas welcome a continuous and ever-growing number of pilgrims. The same is happening in Dioceses all over the world. One can say that Christians everywhere have set out on a journey, both as individuals and as the People of God.
3. In this united jubilee pilgrimage, Blessed Mary leads the way and encourages us as a tender and merciful Mother. Let us learn from her to "hasten" our steps to Christ, whom we will see dying and rising for us at Easter. In our darkest moments let us cherish the memory of God's invitation:"Rejoice ... the Lord is with you".
Blessed Virgin, "cause of our joy", obtain for us the grace of following Christ faithfully, so that we may receive the gift of Easter joy in its fullness.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JUBILEE PILGRIMAGE
OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL II
TO THE HOLY LAND (MARCH 20-26, 2000)
JOHN PAUL II 
ANGELUS
Jerusalem 
Sunday, 26 March 2000
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
These have been days of intense emotion, a time when our soul has been stirred not only by the memory of what God has done but by his very presence, walking with us once again in the Land of Christ’s Birth, Death and Resurrection. And at every step of this Jubilee Pilgrimage Mary has been with us, lighting our pilgrim path and sharing the joys and sorrows of her sons and daughters.
With Mary, Mater dolorosa, we stand in the shadow of the Cross and weep with her over the affliction of Jerusalem and over the sins of the world. We stand with her in the silence of Calvary, and see the blood and water flowing from the wounded side of her Son. Realizing the terrible consequences of sin, we are moved to repentance for our own sins and for the sins of the Church’s children in every age. O Mary, conceived without sin, help us on the path to conversion!
With Mary, Stella matutina, we have been touched by the light of the Resurrection. We rejoice with her that the empty Tomb has become the womb of eternal life, where he who rose from the dead now sits at the Father’s right hand. With her we give endless thanks for the grace of the Holy Spirit whom the Risen Lord sent upon the Church at Pentecost and whom he continually pours into our hearts, for our salvation and for the good of the human family.
Mary, Regina in caelum assumpta. From the Tomb of her Son, we look to the tomb where Mary lay sleeping in peace, awaiting her glorious Assumption. The Divine Liturgy celebrated at her tomb in Jerusalem has Mary say: “Even beyond death, I am not far from you”. And in the Liturgy her children reply: “Seeing your tomb, O holy Mother of God, we seem to contemplate you. O Mary, you are the joy of the angels, the comfort of the afflicted. We proclaim you as the stronghold of all Christians and, most of all, as Mother”.
In contemplating the Theotokos, almost at this journey’s end, we look upon the true face of the Church, radiant in all her beauty, shining with “the glory of God which is on the face of Christ” (2 Cor 4:6). O Advocate, help the Church to be ever more like you, her exalted model. Help her to grow in faith, hope and love, as she searches out and does the will of God in all things (cf. Lumen Gentium, 65). O clement, O loving, O sweet Virgin Mary!
   
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
JUBILEE OF CRAFTSMEN
Sunday, 19 March 2000
  1. Before concluding this solemn Holy Mass, let us prepare to recite the Angelus prayer in spiritual union with St Joseph, the husband of Mary and guardian of the Redeemer. Although this year his liturgical feast has been postponed until tomorrow, it is in homage to the Patron of Workers that you, dear craftsmen, have celebrated your Jubilee today. I greet you all affectionately and ask you to bring my blessing to your homes and workplaces.
The feast of St Joseph also invites us to have a special thought for fathers, who find in him a superb evangelical model. I would like to promise a special prayer for every father of a family, from older ones who have known the joy of becoming grandfathers, to young men who are perhaps anxiously awaiting the birth of their first child. May all fathers be just men like Joseph, ready to make any sacrifice for the good of their families. And may the love of their wives and children reward them for all their efforts!
2. Dear brothers and sisters, I would now like to ask you to pray for several special intentions. Next Friday, 24 March, we will remember the missionaries who have shed their blood for the Gospel with a special day of prayer and fasting. The year 1999 was also marked by the sacrifice of over 30 brothers and sisters: priests, religious, seminarians and lay people actively involved in evangelization. From their witness a prayer for forgiveness and reconciliation rises to God; may their example be an encouragement and support to everyone on the journey of conversion of the Holy Year. Let us remember them in our prayer, as well as everyone who continues to work courageously on the front lines of evangelization.
I also ask you to pray for my jubilee pilgrimage to the Holy Land, which will begin tomorrow. I invoke the protection of Blessed Mary and St Joseph in particular on this highly significant apostolic journey. With deep emotion I will go to the places where the Word became flesh, and lived, died and rose for our salvation. May this visit, inspired only by religious motives, bring the good fruits we desire for the entire Church!
To the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors the Holy Father said:
I extend a warm welcome to the English-speaking craftsmen and workers taking part in this Jubilee celebration. Upon you and your families I invoke the joy and peace of our Saviour Jesus Christ.
Before concluding, the Holy Father said extemporaneously:
We have often remembered St Joseph on this day, but perhaps he has never been remembered before at such a large festive gathering. Thank you all!
© Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS  
DAY OF PARDON

Sunday, 12 March 2000
Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. In the faith context of the Great Jubilee, today we are celebrating the Day of Pardon. This morning in St Peter's Basilica I presided at a moving and solemn penitential act. On this First Sunday of Lent, Bishops and Ecclesial Communities in various parts of the world knelt before God, in the name of the entire Christian people, to implore his forgiveness.
The Holy Year is a time of purification: the Church is holy because Christ is her Head and her Spouse; the Spirit is her life-giving soul; the Virgin Mary and the saints are her most authentic expression. However, the children of the Church know the experience of sin, whose shadows are cast over her, obscuring her beauty. For this reason the Church does not cease to implore God's forgiveness for the sins of her members.
2. This is not a judgement on the subjective responsibility of our brothers and sisters who have gone before us: judgement belongs to God alone, who - unlike us human beings - "sees the heart and the mind" (cf. Jer 20:12). Today's act is a sincere recognition of the sins commited by the Church's children in the distant and recent past, and a humble plea for God's forgiveness. This will reawaken consciences, enabling Christians to enter the third millennium with greater openness to God and his plan of love.
As we ask forgiveness, let us also forgive. This is what we say every day when we recite the prayer Jesus taught us: "Our Father ... forgive us our trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us" (Mt 6:12). For all believers may the fruit of this Jubilee Day be forgiveness reciprocally given and received!
Reconciliation springs from forgiveness. This is our hope for every Ecclesial Community, for all believers in Christ and for the whole world.
3. Forgiven and ready to forgive, Christians enter the third millennium as more credible witnesses to hope. After centuries marked by violence and destruction, especially the last tragic one, the Church offers humanity, as it crosses the threshold of the third millennium, the Gospel of forgiveness and reconciliation, a prerequisite for building genuine peace.
To be witnesses to hope! This is also the theme of the Spiritual Exercises which I will begin this evening with my collaborators in the Roman Curia. For now I thank all who wish to accompany me in prayer, and I call upon Our Lady, Mother of Divine Mercy, to help everyone to observe the Lenten season fruitfully.
© Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS

Sunday, 5 March 2000
1. Before concluding this solemn Eucharistic celebration, I would once again like to thank the Lord for the edifying witness born by our brothers and sisters in the faith whom I have had the joy of beatifying.
May their witness be an encouragement to all of you, dear pilgrims, who have come to honour them. I greet you affectionately and thank you for your presence, as I hope that your Jubilee pilgrimage and your passing through the Holy Door will help you to follow the Gospel with deep fidelity, after the example of the brothers and sisters raised today to the glory of the altars.
2. Let us now turn our gaze to the Queen of Martyrs, whom the new blesseds venerated with great devotion. May Mary help us fervently to observe the season of Lent which will begin next Wednesday with the distribution of ashes.
I entrust to the Blessed Virgin the many prayer requests that are coming from every place. I am thinking in particular of the people of Mozambique, who are experiencing a tragedy of unprecedented dimensions due to the serious flooding of an extensive part of their land. International solidarity has been working tirelessly in recent days, but much still remains to be done. I encourage everyone to continue generously in the relief work to alleviate the tragic situation of our brothers and sisters in every way possible.
I would also like to recall the victims of the recent tragic sinking of the Spanish ship Zafir. As I invoke the Lord's mercy on the dead, I hope that everything possible will be done to recover the missing sailors' bodies and return them to their families for proper burial.
I cordially greet the French-speaking people here this morning, especially the Vietnamese pilgrims who came for the beatification of the catechist Andrew, as well as the Cameroonians in Italy who are celebrating their Jubilee. I hope they will all be living witnesses to Christ the Saviour. May God bless you!
I greet the English-speaking pilgrims present for this Mass of beatification, especially those from the Philippines and Thailand. May the example of the holy martyrs strengthen all Christians in their witness to the Gospel during this Jubilee Year and always. Upon all of you I invoke the grace and peace of our Lord Jesus Christ.
I also greet the many Brazilian pilgrims. Today is a day of thanksgiving, for the protomartyrs of Brazil have been raised to the honours of the altar. May the intercession of Bl. André Soveral, Bl. Ambrósio Francisco Ferro and their communities spur you to follow the true ways of heroism that lead to holiness. Praised be Our Lord Jesus Christ.
I cordially greet the pilgrims from Poland and other countries of the world who have come for the solemn beatification of Sr Maria Stella Mardosewicz and her 10 Nazareth sisters from Nowogródek. May the intercession of the newly beatified martyrs bring God's abundant graces and blessings to everyone.
© Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS

Sunday, 20 February 2000
Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The celebrations for the Jubilee of Permanent Deacons, organized by the Congregation for the Clergy, are closing today. I would first like to extend a warm greeting to the many deacons who have come to Rome from all over the world, together with their families, for this special occasion. In particular, I greet you, dear brothers, who were ordained to the diaconate this morning in the Vatican Basilica.
I am very pleased that all of you are here, because you give me the opportunity to stress the importance of your role:  by sacramental ordination the deacon takes on a special "diakonia", which is expressed particularly in service to the Gospel. During the rite, the ordaining Bishop says these words:  "Receive the Gospel of Christ, whose herald you now are. Believe what you read, teach what you believe and practise what you teach". This is your mission, dear brothers:  embrace the Gospel, reflect on its message in faith, love it and bear witness to it in word and deed. The work of the new evangelization needs your contribution, marked by consistency and dedication, by courage and generosity, in the daily service of the liturgy, of the word and of charity. Live your mission joyously and faithfully, you deacons who are called by celibacy to a life that is totally dedicated to God and his kingdom. Live it, you married deacons, whom Christ asks to be models of true love in family life. The Lord has chosen all of you to cooperate with him in the work of salvation.
2. Next Tuesday I will have the joy of celebrating the Jubilee of the Roman Curia together with my collaborators. This has been preceded by several meetings of reflection and prayer in which the members of the Curia have prepared intensely to live this moment of grace, which invites us to conversion of heart. Everyone who works in the service of the Holy See - Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, priests, religious and laity - will enter together through the Holy Door, a symbol of mercy and a call to the renewal of life.
A very close bond joins the Curia family to the Successor of Peter, who avails himself of its service in exercising the ministry entrusted to him by Christ for the benefit of the entire Ecclesial Community. It is therefore important that he be able to count not only on the ability and efficiency of his collaborators, but also on their communion in a love so profound as to make the Curia, as Pope Paul VI liked to say, a "permanent Upper Room", totally dedicated to the good of the Church. The purification which is a goal of the Jubilee experience will certainly make a positive contribution in this regard.
3. To the Virgin Mary I entrust all my collaborators in the Curia, as well as the permanent deacons and other members of the Ecclesial Community:  through the intercession of Mary most holy may the harmonious fusion of all the energies of God's People make the Church's work in the world for humanity's salvation ever more effective.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 13 February 2000
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. I have vivid memories of the extraordinary celebration of the Jubilee of the Sick in St Peter's Square last Friday, the feast of Our Lady of Lourdes.
Illness helps us to understand the human mystery. Like the leper mentioned in this Sunday's Gospel, when we are ill we experience human frailty and feel a strong desire to recover. In Jesus, who is moved to compassion for us, we find support and the answer to our deepest longings. In his Cross every form of suffering can become meaningful; illness never stops being a trial, but it is enlightened by hope.
Yes, God does not want sickness; he did not create evil or death. But ever since they entered the world because of sin, all his love has been directed to restoring man's health, to healing him from sin and all evil and to filling him with life, peace and joy. This is the comforting message of the Jubilee and, in particular, of this Great Jubilee marking the 2,000th anniversary of Christ's Incarnation.
2. Continuing our Jubilee journey, which becomes more and more filled with spiritual opportunities, next Friday, 18 February, the liturgical memorial of Blessed Angelico, their patron, we will celebrate the Jubilee of Artists. On this occasion I will have the joy of meeting these brothers and sisters who, endowed by God with special intuitive and expressive abilities, which they cultivate by study and experience, become privileged interpreters of the human mystery. They will come to Rome to show their faith in Jesus Christ, the incarnate Word of God, the epiphany of divine beauty in human form. Christ is the supreme source of inspiration for all art, and the contemporary era, although marked by atheism, confirms this:  the greatest artists from every continent have felt the need to measure themselves against Jesus and his inexhaustible mystery. This is why the Church engages in a special dialogue with art.
3. Let us entrust this exceptional Jubilee celebration to the Virgin All Fair. In her, preserved from the stain of original sin, shines the brightness of Christ, the Beauty which redeemed the world. May Our Lady help us to love this Beauty and make it constantly shine in our lives.
After leading the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the faithful. To the English-speaking pilgrims he said: 
I extend a special greeting to the Filipino pilgrims from Florence, and I pray that almighty God will continue to bless your community with vigorous faith and generosity in works of charity. Upon all the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors, I invoke the abundant blessings of almighty God.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 27 February 2000
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. I thank the Lord who, after the special commemoration of Abraham celebrated in the Paul VI Hall last Wednesday, enabled me in these days to make my intended pilgrimage to Egypt, the hospitable land which gave refuge to the Holy Family when fleeing from Herod, which has welcomed the Gospel since apostolic times and which is heir to an ancient culture. The climax of this pilgrimage was going up to Mount Sinai.
I am grateful to President Mubarak and to the Egyptian authorities, the organizers and everyone who in various ways helped me to make this visit in the footsteps of Moses. I once again thank the Orthodox Coptic Church, with whose Patriarch, His  Holiness Shenouda III, I had a cordial conversation, as well as Hegumen Damianos and the Greek Orthodox monks for their hospitality at Mount Sinai.
2. I send a warm and grateful greeting to the fervent Catholic community, with whom I was able to celebrate a solemn Holy Mass in Cairo's Sports Stadium on Friday, in which all the Churches of Egypt took part:  the Coptic with Patriarch Ghattas, the Latin, Maronite, Greek, Armenian, Syrian and Chaldean.
An important ecumenical meeting was held in the new cathedral, consecrated last Christmas, with representatives and faithful of the Churches and Ecclesial Communities in Egypt. In this regard I would like to emphasize how productive the dialogue with the Orthodox Coptic Church has been and I pray the Lord that it may bear ever richer fruits of mutual knowledge and collaboration.
I would also like to thank the Grand Sheikh of al-Azhar Sayed Tantawi, leader of the Muslim community, to which the majority of the people belong, for our courteous meeting.
Now my thoughts turn to the principal goal of my pilgrimage, the ancient Monastery of St Catherine on Mount Sinai. There, in a simple but moving ceremony, I was able to commemorate both the moment when God spoke from the burning bush and revealed his name "I am" to Moses, and the moment when he made the Covenant with the People on the basis of the Decalogue. The fundamental norms of the natural law are reflected in the Ten Commandments. The Decalogue shows the way to a fully human life. Without it there is no calm or peaceful future for individuals, families or nations.
3. My gaze now turns to the Holy Land, where, God willing, I will go the last week of March. As I thank those who have accompanied me in prayer and continue to be close to me with their spiritual support, I pray the Mother of the Redeemer that my visit to the places where the Word of God "pitched his tent" among human beings 2,000 years ago may benefit the whole Church and all the world.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
I affectionately greet the directors and members of the Centesimus Annus Pro-Pontifice Foundation, who yesterday devoted an intense day of study to the complex problem of the relationship between ethics and finance. Dear friends, I cordially bless you and your families, and hope that the abundant grace of the Jubilee will deeply renew your hearts and make you generous witnesses to the social message of the Gospel.
© Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS

Sunday, 6 February 2000    

Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. Today Pro-life Day is being celebrated in Italy with the theme, "To us a son is given", echoing the words of the prophet Isaiah (9: 6) that resounded in the Christmas liturgy. In their customary Message for this day, the Italian Bishops have reminded the faithful that every child is an immense gift: for the couple, the family, the Church and society.
The worrying population decline occurring in recent years must be a subject of careful reflection for Italian society and an incentive for renewal, both in mentality and in cultural, political and legislative decisions. This is certainly a task for public institutions, which are called to remove the difficulties that hinder families. But it is up to married couples above all to reinvigorate the culture of love and life by rediscovering their mission as parents, which they accepted at the time of their marriage.
2. The culture of life is the ideal setting not only for welcoming children, but also for respect and concern for every person, beginning with the weakest and most defenceless. In this regard, I gladly take the opportunity to recall that the Jubilee of the Sick and Health-Care Workers will be celebrated next Friday, 11 February, the memorial of Our Lady of Lourdes.
This special Jubilee day highlights the importance of human life in the plan of Redemption: Christ emphasized the healing of the sick as a sign of God's kingdom; and by his passion and death, he, humanity's Good Samaritan, redeemed us from sin to give us the health of soul and body as a gift. Following in his footsteps, the Church draws near to suffering human beings, in every place and time, with countless works for the sick, especially the poorest and most abandoned.
In preparation for the Jubilee of the Sick a study conference will be held in the Vatican next Wednesday and Thursday on the identity of Catholic health professionals and on the challenges that await them at the beginning of the third millennium. On Thursday, Holy Mass will be celebrated for the sick at the Basilica of St Paul-Outside-the-Walls, while I myself will preside at the Mass here in St Peter's Square on 11 Friday. Finally, the Way of the Cross will be celebrated next Saturday at the Colosseum, and in the evening a festive meeting will be held in Paul VI Auditorium.
3. Let us entrust to Blessed Mary the Church's efforts in Italy and throughout the world to defend and promote human life. We ask her, Mother of the Suffering and Health of the Sick, for her special intercession, so that every person who experiences difficult moments will find light and comfort in the Gospel of life.
After praying the Angelus the Holy Father said:
I greet the Roman group of the Pro-Life Movement, who have come here for today's Pro-Life Day, with the Vicegerent, representing the Vicar, Cardinal Camillo Ruini, to whom I extend an affectionate greeting as I await his imminent return to service.
I greet all the pilgrims, especially the faithful from the parishes of Our Lady of Grace in Trieste, St Mary of Prayer in Rome, St Nicholas of Bari in Monte Libretti and Sacred Heart in Nettuno.
I also affectionately greet the young people from the deanery of Castano Primo in the Archdiocese of Milan, and the many girls of the Focolare Movement who have come from various European countries.
May prayer and the profession of faith at the tomb of St Peter be an important moment of the Great Jubilee for everyone.
I wish you all a pleasant Sunday and a good week.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS

Sunday, 30 January 2000
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The Jubilee of Consecrated Life, that is, of those who have consecrated their life to Christ by taking the vows of poverty, chastity and obedience, will be celebrated next Wednesday, 2 February, the feast of the Presentation of Jesus in the Temple.
I would like to extend a cordial greeting to these brothers and sisters of ours: to those who have gathered in Rome for this occasion and to all who will be celebrating the Jubilee in their respective Dioceses in every part of the world. I encourage everyone to pass through the Holy Door with trust and hope, renewing his complete readiness to make his life a hymn of praise to the Holy Trinity.
Here in Rome we are preparing for this event with a triduum that begins today. Today is dedicated to thanksgiving for their vocation and consecration, priceless gifts of God, shared with the individual in Jesus Christ, the Father's "Consecrated One". The theme tomorrow will be fraternal communion, and in the afternoon the Paul VI Auditorium in the Vatican will host a festive gathering of consecrated persons, which can be followed on radio and television. Then on 1 February mission and witness will be emphasized with Eucharistic adoration at the Basilica of St Mary Major. The highlight of the Jubilee of consecrated life will be Holy Mass in St Peter's Square, at which, please God, I will have the joy of presiding, surrounded by a large gathering of consecrated persons.
2. I invite you spiritually to join our brothers and sisters who express the various forms of consecrated life, because their vocation is a gift for the whole Church! The Bride of Christ, i.e., the Church, owes much of her beauty to the countless charisms of consecration which the Holy Spirit has bestowed among the faithful down the centuries, from the apostolic community until today. By their very presence, consecrated persons are a sign of Christ and his way of life, and, while inviting us to prefer nothing to God and his kingdom, they are an example to everyone of generosity in prayer and of dedication to neighbour.
3. This is what we see perfectly fulfilled in Mary of Nazareth: her utterly unique union with the incarnate Word makes her the model of the evangelical life: obedient, poor and chaste, as was Jesus' life.
Consecrated men and women have always seen the Blessed Virgin as the mother of their vocation, experiencing her tender assistance in both favourable and difficult times. Today let us entrust to Mary all her consecrated sons and daughters. Let us pray that humanity will find in their Gospel witness an effective help for walking in the new millennium according to God's plan.
After leading the Angelus, the Holy Father extended a special greeting to those suffering from Hansen's disease:
Today is World Leprosy Day, the day dedicated to those for whom the Church, following Christ's example, has always had a special concern. I embrace all our brothers and sisters who suffer from Hansen's disease, and again express my hope that in this Jubilee Year they can experience the healing power of solidarity.
© Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 23 January 2000
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. I vividly recall the emotion I felt last Tuesday as we opened the Holy Door at the Basilica of St Paul-Outside-the-Walls during a solemn ecumenical celebration with Orthodox Metropolitan Athanasios, Anglican Archbishop George Carey and the representatives of many Churches and Ecclesial Communities. I wanted this event to coincide with the beginning of the Week of Prayer for Christian Unity, with the intention of showing how the restoration of Christian unity is a commitment we share and must inspire the great prayer being offered to the Lord in every part of the world during this Jubilee Year.
The act of opening together that Door, which is a symbol of Christ, was an eloquent sign encouraging us to continue on the path that still lies before us and for which we must above all continue to pray. I thank the Churches and Ecclesial Communities for sending their representatives, making it possible to give the world this sign of hope, and I assure them once again of my intention
to support every action that will make our longing for unity ever more genuine and effective.
The day after tomorrow, the feast of the Conversion of St Paul, the closing of the Week of Prayer for Christian Unity will be celebrated in the very basilica dedicated to him, with Cardinal Roger Etchegaray presiding.
2. Almost a month has passed since the beginning of the Great Jubilee, and throughout the Church there is a great ferment of spiritual and charitable initiatives. Today I would like to mention one of them: the Pontifical Council for Pastoral Assistance to Health-Care Workers has organized in Rome a series of prayer meetings for the sick at the Basilica of St Mary Major. This will take place on the last Tuesday of every month during the Jubilee Year.
The choice of St Mary Major as the place for these meetings is significant: prayer for the successful outcome of the Jubilee and for the physical and spiritual health of the suffering will be entrusted to the intercession of the Mother of God. I invite all the sick and those who care for them to keep this initiative in mind and to join it in spirit from their homes or nursing facilities.
3. Let us now turn to the Blessed Virgin, who in welcoming the Angel's announcement became the docile cooperator in the mystery of the Incarnation of God's Son. Let us learn from her to live each day of this Holy Year as a time of grace which awaits our personal response. May Mary help us to foster unity, beginning with the family, the parish and the workplace. And may she obtain for us a generous heart that is sensitive to the needs of our brothers and sisters.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted various pilgrim groups and condemned the bomb explosion in Madrid, Spain, that claimed the life of an army officer on 21 January.
In cordially greeting the Spanish-speaking pilgrims, I would like to express my deep sorrow at the news of the recent terrorist attack last Friday in the capital of Spain which claimed the life of a public servant and violently ended the 15 months that had raised hopes of peace.
I strongly deplore this detestable act which seriously endangers the efforts of those who seek just and peaceful solutions for coexistence. I ask the Lord for the conversion of those who use or create terror to impose their ideas, and for harmony among all the citizens of the beloved Spanish nation.
    © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana/font>
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS

Sunday, 16 January 2000
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. The Week of Prayer for Christian Unity, which assumes even greater importance during the Jubilee Year, will begin the day after tomorrow, 18 January. Indeed, the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000 has a strong ecumenical character as a "concrete sign of the journey which ... the faithful of the different Churches and Ecclesial Communities have been making" (Incarnationis mysterium, n. 4). To underscore this fundamental aspect of the Holy Year, we will go with the delegations of many Churches and Ecclesial Communities to the Basilica of St Paul-Outside-the-Walls to open the Holy Door with a solemn Ecumenical Celebration.
Only with God's help can we advance on the path of unity and overcome the divisions created in the Christian world during the second millennium. I thank the Lord that in St Paul's Basilica we will have the joy of meeting and praying with representatives of the principal Churches and Ecclesial Communities, to whom I extend at this moment a most cordial welcome. We will ask God and one another to forgive the sins committed against the unity of the Church and, at the same time, we will give thanks for the journey of reconciliation we have made, especially in the last century. I invite all believers to join in our prayer that the beginning of the third millennium can experience a promising development in ecumenical relations.
2. The theme of the Week of Prayer this year 2000 is inspired by a well-known phrase of St Paul at the beginning of the Letter to the Ephesians:  "Blessed be God ... who has blessed us in Christ" (Eph 1: 3). The Apostle raises a hymn of praise to the Triune God for this marvellous plan of salvation, which embraces history and the cosmos and is centred in Christ.
This theme, which we are reflecting on during the 2,000th anniversary of the Incarnation, was chosen by a working group from the Middle East representing the various Christian confessions in the Land of Jesus. This gives me the opportunity to recall that the Day for Religious Dialogue between Jews and Christians will be observed tomorrow in Italy:  an initiative which, although distinct from the Ecumenical Week, in some way prepares for it by inviting us to go to the roots, that is, to God's covenant with Israel.
3. Jesus sprang from these roots through the Blessed Virgin Mary. Let us ask her to protect the ecumenical journey. Let us entrust to her motherly intercession the prayer for unity which will rise with one voice from all the Ecclesial Communities in the next few days, so that it will prompt attitudes and acts of true reconciliation and fraternal love everywhere.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said: 
I extend a cordial greeting to everyone who attended the international conference on Hansen's disease which was held at the Vatican yesterday and organized by the Pontifical Council for Pastoral Assistance to Health-Care Workers and the Italian Association of the Friends of Raoul Follereau. I express my appreciation of their effort on behalf of those suffering from leprosy, of whom there are still about 15 million in the world.
I hope that the year 2000 will mark a decisive step forward in the treatment and recovery of our brothers and sisters. Hansen's disease can actually be cured with medicines that are relatively inexpensive but are often not available to the sick because of their poverty. The most dangerous "leprosy", in fact, is poverty, which must be combatted at the economic level, and prior to that, by a profound conversion from the logic of selfishness to one of solidarity. May the Holy Year awaken in Christian souls generous openness to all our brothers and sisters in need.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 9 January 2000
    Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. Today's liturgical feast of the Baptism of the Lord closes the Christmas season, which we observed this year with exceptional fervour and participation. Indeed, the Great Jubilee began on the Holy Night with the opening of the Holy Door in St Peter's.
This Christmas season has offered us a new occasion to recall the "fact" that occurred 20 centuries ago and definitively changed the course of history: Jesus' birth in Bethlehem.
In recalling Jesus' birth, we celebrated the great mystery of Redemption, to which we pay particular attention throughout the course of the Jubilee. The Son of God became man so that man could be raised to the dignity of God's adoptive son.
2. Today's feast of the Baptism of the Lord reminds us of this intimate union with the divine life. As in past years, today I again had the joy of administering the sacrament of Baptism to a group of children in the Sistine Chapel. There were 18 all together: eight girls and 10 boys, from Italy, Brazil, Spain, the United States and Switzerland. In the context of the Jubilee Year, a time of grace, joy and renewal of life, this celebration of the sacrament of Baptism is a reminder for us all to return to the roots of our Christian vocation. All the good we accomplish with God's help really has its foundation in Baptism which, by imparting divine grace to us, makes us children of God and incorporates us into the community of believers.
3. Let us entrust these boys and girls who were baptized today, together with their families, their godparents and their Christian communities, to Blessed Mary, Mother of the Saviour. May the Holy Virgin accompany them with her motherly protection as they grow in faith and enable them to share every more deeply in the mystery of salvation which was initiated in them today.
May Our Lady also assist us, so that in this Jubilee Year we can be ever more faithful to our baptismal commitments by nourishing day after day the flame of faith entrusted to us at the beginning of our Christian lives.
After reciting the Angelus the Holy Father greeted the faithful.
I extend a cordial greeting to all the pilgrims here, especially the faithful from Castellana Grotte and Monopoli, and the friends of "Fraterna Domus".

© Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Thursday, 6 January 2000
Solemnity of the Epiphany
Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. Today's Gospel speaks about the Magi who, guided by a star, came from the East to adore Jesus in Bethlehem. It is the Epiphany of Christ, that is, his manifestation to all peoples. The Messiah is born of David's lineage, thus fulfilling the prophets' promises, but his message of salvation is universal: the glory of Israel and light for all peoples (cf. Lk 2: 32).
Today's solemnity therefore reveals the universal vocation of the Church, which is called to reflect the light of the Lord on her face. In this liturgical and spiritual context, I ordained 12 new Bishops this morning from various countries of the world. As I again offer them my fervent good wishes, I invite you to pray that in their ministry they may always be authentic witnesses to the Gospel and wise and generous leaders of God's People.
2. My thoughts now turn to the Christian East, where my brothers in faith, the Patriarchs of the Orthodox Churches, live and proclaim the Gospel: in Constantinople, Antioch, Jerusalem, Moscow, Romania, Georgia and every other land where these Churches sing the praises of the Word of God made man. I would like to name them one by one, while expressing the ardent hope that the light of Christ, whose birth they are celebrating at this time, will give them in abundance all that can strengthen the proclamation of the one Gospel of salvation.
To the Orthodox Churches and to the Eastern Catholic Churches which celebrate Christ's birth tomorrow, I wish a Happy Christmas in the words of a troparion well known to them: "Your birth, O Christ our God, made the light of truth shine in the world ... Guided by a star they came to adore you, the sun of justice, and to acknowledge you, the heavenly dawn. O Lord, glory to you".
3. Thinking of all the Churches of the Christian East, I offer them my wishes for prosperity and joy. I do so while participating in spirit in the song of their Liturgies and sharing in the many gifts the Lord has lavished on their traditions and which enrich the Church of Christ.
At the beginning of this new year, as we fervently observe the Great Jubilee, we entrust to Mary, the "Morning Star", the Church's evangelizing mission and the journey of Christians toward the full unity desired by our Redeemer.
After praying the Angelus the Holy Father said:
I extend a warm greeting to you, dear faithful who have come for the ordination of the new Bishops, and I cordially bless the Ecclesial Communities to which you belong.
I greet the participants in the "Viva la Befana" folkloric parade, which follows that of last Sunday's Magi Kings on route to Cori and Giulianello. These initiatives remind everyone of the value of pilgrimages, the symbol of the journey of conversion and an essential element of the Jubilee.
I would especially like to mention the young people of Ischia, gathered in the cathedral for a diocesan jubilee celebration and joined to us by radio and television. Dear young people, I affectionately greet you and your Pastor, Bishop Filippo Strofaldi. May the visit of the World Youth Day pilgrim Cross to your beautiful island strengthen all of you in the faith and joy of being the Lord's disciples. I await you in Rome for the Great Jubilee of young people next August.
© Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday 2 January 2000
Children's Jubilee
  Praised be Jesus Christ! Welcome!
Dear children, dear boys and girls!
1. I am very pleased to be with you who are celebrating your Jubilee today. Thank you for the enthusiasm with which you fill this square with festivity, and thank you too for the message you have addressed to me. I greet you all with deep affection. I greet Bishop Agostino Superbo, General Chaplain of Italian Catholic Action, who has expressed your sentiments. I also greet Cardinal Camillo Ruini, the Bishops and priests, as well as your parents and teachers who have wished to be with you today. We are many. And from here one cannot see how far you reach: probably as far as the Tiber.
Your presence is a reminder that the Jubilee is a time of joy. God is a good Father, always ready to forgive and to offer his children opportunities to start to live and hope once more. Once again he opens his heart, so that each person, by repenting of his sins, committing himself to good resolutions and making acts of faith and love, can return to the path that leads to him.
Dear children and young people! You have come to Rome from Italy and other countries in the world to form a friendship with Jesus, after the example of the young saints like Pancras and Tarsicius, who gave their lives to stay faithful to Christ! The effort and hardships that you had to face made you realize that following the Gospel requires sacrifice but fills one with joy. Have a good Jubilee!
2. Dear children, dear young people, this morning many of you, with your parents and those escorting you, have taken part in the Jubilee Mass in St Peter's Basilica. In giving himself to you in the Eucharist, Jesus has shown you that life acquires its full value when it becomes a gift for others. The witness of the saints and martyrs who are venerated in the Eternal City have made you understand that it is only with Christ that you can accomplish great things and that it is only with him that you can be happy and make others happy.
You want to shout out your joy to everyone for the gift the Father gave us in sending his Son Jesus to become our brother. Witness to the world that by receiving Jesus in our midst, it is possible to make humanity one great family. Many among you speak French, probably everyone speaks French without exception.
3. At the beginning of a new year, dear children and young people, we cannot forget all those of your own age who are suffering hunger or violence, and those who are victims of hideous forms of exploitation. How could we forget the many children who are denied even the right to be born?
When people want to build a world ignoring God and his law, they are in fact giving rise to a situation of more and more suffering and injustice. With the Jubilee the Lord invites us to correct these wrongs by cooperating in the great plan he has for every person and for the whole human race. Jesus also needs you for this task. He is entrusting his plans to you and he is asking you: Do you wish to be my friend? Do you wish to help me to make the world more beautiful and welcoming? Do you wish to be witnesses to my love in the Church and in the world?
Say "yes" to him with enthusiasm, and bear the joy of the Gospel into the new millennium. We belong more to a new millennium, the third millennium, than to the second.
4. Dear children, you surely remember what happened when, during the pilgrimage to Jerusalem, the 12-year-old Jesus remained in the temple. Mary and Joseph found him speaking to the teachers, who were amazed at his understanding and his answers (cf. Lk 2: 47-48). You will also remember how he himself, being a tireless preacher of God's love for men and women, suggested to his disciples that they take children as a model of those who receive the kingdom of God (cf. Mk 10: 14-15).
By starting the series of solemn Jubilee celebrations with you, children and young people, the Church puts you at the centre of the attention of believers. Receive the gift of the Jubilee and go home changed by the love of Jesus who has given you his friendship. Follow him enthusiastically and help everyone draw near to him with total trust. Jesus is the Holy Door that enables us to enter God's kingdom. We see, we hear that Spanish people are present: we see that there are many of them.
I greet the children who have come from Poland for today's meeting on the occasion of the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000. I am very pleased that you have come here to St Peter's Square, because this way you bear witness to your love for Jesus Christ and to your desire to walk with him in your life.
He loves you too and wants to help you. He understands your desires and is awaiting your response.
Dear young people, you are humanity's hope; through you, may Christ's love spread to your surroundings, to your families and to your whole world. I entrust you to the protection of Our Lady. Take this greeting to your peers, your parents, your brothers and sisters, and all children in Poland.
6. A happy Jubilee to you all, dear children and young people! I bless you affectionately together with your families and teachers, and I pray that Jesus, your great and faithful friend, will make you the hope and joy of the world! Happy New Year!
Before leading the Angelus the Holy Father said:
Let us see if you can also speak Latin, or at least pray in it!
At the end of the meeting the Holy Father added:
Before leaving you, I would still like to thank the Lord for the good weather. It is a little cold, but it is beautiful: we have sun and no rain. Deo gratias! I wish you all the best today and a safe return home.
Happy New Year to everyone! Praised be Jesus Christ!
At the end of his meeting with children in St Peter's Square, the Holy Father awarded the John XXIII International Peace Prize to the French association "Aide à toute détresse Quart monde":
Today, at the children's and young people's Jubilee, the day after World Day of Prayer for Peace, I am pleased to be able to award the John XXIII International Peace Prize to the movement "Aide à toute détresse Quart monde". My venerable Predecessor established this form of recognition on 10 May 1963 to serve the great cause of peace and to encourage in the world those who are tirelessly dedicated to relieving physical and spiritual misery.
"Aide à toute détresse - Quart monde" is making a praiseworthy contribution to peace in the world. It helps the poor by trying to make them the protagonists of their own development and encouraging them to make their specific contribution as human beings at the service of society. Founded in the suburbs of Paris in 1957 by Fr Joseph Wresinski, the association is present today in many parts of the world with projects of high social value, sustained by a specifically Christian inspiration.
Its constant evangelical commitment in the fight against extreme poverty, its active interest in the field of human rights and the work it does for children in collaboration with UNICEF and the Human Rights Commission make this deserving association worthy to receive the John XXIII International Peace Prize, which today I have the joy of presenting to its representatives. In giving them this recognition, I invite the members of "Aide à toute détresse - Quart monde" to continue courageously in their work, especially on behalf of children, who are the future of every society.
May adults give them their best attention, so that they can learn how to build a world where everyone can live in truth, justice and love.
  © Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Saturday, 1 January 2000
 World Day of Peace
    Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. Let us give thanks to God, who has given us the opportunity to begin another year. As I beseech him to protect and give his grace to everyone, I offer my most cordial wishes to all for a happy New Year 2000!
On Christmas night, we listened once again to the angels' message: "Glory to God in the highest and on earth peace among men with whom he is pleased" (Lk 2: 14). This is the proclamation of hope which I wanted once again to present in my traditional Message for today's World Day of Peace. God loves us and he gives everyone the hope of a new time, a time of salvation and peace.
2. Yes, Christ is our peace. He calls us to love every human being without discrimination, turning our hearts and minds to thoughts of peace and removing the temptation of violence and war. The Jubilee which has just begun is a pressing invitation to love in view of a reconciled humanity.
Let us cross the threshold of a new year with a commitment to make our contribution so that peace can become the daily language of peoples. The Gospel teaches us that dialogue, cooperation, respect for life and solidarity are effective instruments for creating new relationships between peoples and countries, between rich and poor, believers and non-believers.
From every part of the earth rises a heartfelt plea for peace. Let us pray that it does not go unheard. At this moment, my thoughts turn to those who are victims of violence, to those who feel lonely and abandoned.
May Christ, the incarnate Son of God, enlighten human hearts with the gift of peace. You, Son of the Most High, were born for everyone. You are the same yesterday, today and for ever!
3. The first day of the year is placed under the special protection of Mary. Let us begin the Year 2000 under the loving gaze of the Mother of God, who gives Christ, the Prince of Peace, to the world. May she spread the mantle of her motherhood over all of us, protect us from evil and free us from hatred and violence. May she accompany humanity on the ways of peace. May every person discover in others, beyond every border, the face of brothers and sisters, friends, members of the same family.
Mary, Mother of God, make us apostles of peace!
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the faithful in various languages. To the English-speaking pilgrims he said: 
To all English-speakers listening to me, I wish a Happy and Blessed New Year!
The Holy Father also addressed participants in the city of Rome's international marathon. The runners had assembled in St Peter's Square, the race's starting-point.
I extend my most cordial greeting to those taking part in the great "City of Rome Marathon", a special event that opens the Jubilee Year for those involved in sport. I greet in particular the directors of the International Track and Field Federation, the directors of the Italian National Olympic Committee, the Mayor of Rome and the other authorities here.
Dear athletes, fans, organizers and those in charge of this interesting sports adventure, you have chosen the first day of 2000 for your now traditional event.
I willingly bless all of you who are taking part in the competition and you, even more numerous, who are taking part in the so-called "stracittadina". At the dawn of a new year - of an extraordinary year like 2000 - in running through the streets of the city of Rome, you make yourselves messengers of brotherhood and peace.
Yours is a long race that demands commitment and effort and for which you have prepared with the appropriate training. What is important for each runner is to reach the goal.
Life can be compared to a unique marathon which we are all called to run, each in his own way and at his own pace. A common goal awaits us, however, and it is the encounter with Christ. My deep hope is that throughout this Jubilee Year every man and woman will become aware of the meaning and value of life to be spent at the service of their brethren, according to God's providential plan.
Dear brothers and sisters, have a good marathon! May this race be a celebration of sport and brotherhood! Happy New Year 2000!
Before leaving the Pope added:
May the New Year and the new millennium be as beautiful as today!
© Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
 ANGELUS
Feast of the Holy Family
Sunday, 30 December 2001
  1. Today we shift our gaze from the grotto of Bethlehem where the Saviour was born on Holy Night to the humble house of Nazareth, to contemplate the Holy Family of Jesus, Mary and Joseph, whose feast we celebrate in the festive, family atmosphere of Christmas.
The Redeemer of the world chose the family as the place for his birth and growth, thereby sanctifying this fundamental institution of every society. The time he spent in Nazareth, the greater part of his life, continues to be shrouded in deep silence. Very little information about it has been passed on to us by the Evangelists. However, if we aspire to a deeper understanding of Jesus' life and mission, we must draw close to the mystery of the Holy Family of Nazareth to observe and listen. Today's liturgy offers us a providential opportunity to do so.

2. For every believer, and especially for Christian families, the humble dwelling place in Nazareth is an authentic school of the Gospel. Here we admire, put into practice, the divine plan to make the family an intimate community of life and love; here we learn that every Christian family is called to be a small "domestic church" that must shine with the Gospel virtues. Recollection and prayer, mutual understanding and respect, personal discipline and community asceticism and a spirit of sacrifice, work and solidarity are typical features that make the family of Nazareth a model for every home.
I wanted to highlight these values in the Apostolic Exhortation Familiaris consortio whose 20th anniversary occurred this year. The future of humanity passes through the family which in our time has been more marked than any other institution by the profound and rapid changes in culture and society. However, the Church has never ceased "to speak and offer her help to those who are already aware of the value of marriage and the family and seek to live it faithfully, to those who are uncertain and anxious and searching for the truth, and to those who are unjustly impeded from living freely their family lives" (Familiaris consortio, n. 1). She is aware of her responsibility and today too intends to continue "to offer her services to every person who wonders about the destiny of marriage and the family" (ibid.).

3. The Church relies especially on the witness and contribution of Christian families to fulfil her urgent mission. Indeed, in the face of the dangers and difficulties that beset the family institution, she invites families to have greater spiritual and apostolic boldness, knowing that the family is called to be "a sign of unity for the world" and thus to bear witness to "the Kingdom and peace of Christ, towards which the whole world is journeying" (ibid., n. 48).
May Jesus, Mary and Joseph bless and protect all the world's families, so that within them may reign the serenity and joy, justice and peace that the newborn Christ has given as a gift to humanity.
After leading the prayer of the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted pilgrims from various regions of Italy, and said: 
Tomorrow at 6.00 p.m. in St Peter's Basilica, I will preside at the celebration of Vespers with the solemn Te Deum of thanksgiving. Every year brings its joys and sorrows, problems and new prospects. I invite everyone to end the year 2001 thanking God and leaving behind all enmity, so as to begin 2002 in the peace and love of Christ. This is my wish for everyone, which I entrust to the intercession of the Holy Family of Nazareth.
© Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Feast of St Stephen
Wednesday, 26 December 2001

Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The atmosphere suffused with the light and joy of Christmas lingers in today's liturgical feast. Inwardly fascinated, we are still contemplating the miracle wrought in the Holy Night. We continue to meditate on the Christmas mystery and on the demanding requirements that derive from it.
"Be not afraid; for behold, I bring you tidings of a great joy which will come to all the people; for to you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, who is Christ the Lord" (Lk 2,10-11). These words, spoken by the angels in Bethlehem and which astonished the shepherds, ring out in our time too. They invite us not to be frightened, since the Messiah, the long-awaited Saviour who at last came down from heaven to redeem all humanity, is born for us. His birth is an incomparable gift which, if understood and totally accepted, changes life and renders a person capable of the evangelical heroism proper to saints.

2. This is also the message we can glean from the Protomartyr St Stephen whom we celebrate today. His feast adds another element to our understanding of Christ's birth. This young deacon was distinguished for the courage and constancy with which he was able to proclaim the Gospel to his compatriots and render a loving service to the poor. His martyrdom reminds us that the Child Jesus, from the grotto where he lay defenceless in a manger, is calling us to follow him step by step to Golgotha, to the Cross, to share in his triumphant victory over death. He is demanding, this Child we contemplate in the nativity scene; but he is also an understanding and patient Child.
If we are docile to his action, he takes us by the hand and goes with us:  so we should not be afraid. At times it can seem very hard to follow in his footsteps, but if he walks with us everything becomes easier and less of a burden. The Holy Martyr Stephen helps us to understand this profound truth and put it into practice every day.

3. With great cordiality, dear brothers and sisters, I repeat to you my fervent good wishes for Chrismas and I ask the newborn Saviour, through the intercession of his Virgin Mother, to instil sentiments of joy, reciprocal understanding and peace in every heart.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus the Holy Father said: 
This year too, I am delighted to see that the crib, a simple and deep representation of the Christmas mystery, has been set up with the Christmas tree in St Peter's Square. And everyday I can admire with pleasure the people, especially children, who flock to visit it until late in the evening.
I cordially thank those who arranged it and I assure the pilgrims and visitors of my prayer that the encounter with the Child Jesus will bring serenity and peace to them all.
I once again bless you with affection, dear brothers and sisters, as I renew to you and to your families my very best wishes for a happy Christmas season!
© Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Fourth Sunday of Advent, 23 December 2001
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today we are celebrating the Fourth Sunday of Advent, while preparations are well under way for the feast of Christmas. The Word of God in the liturgy helps us focus our attention on the meaning of this fundamental saving event, which is at once historic and supernatural.
"Behold, a young woman shall conceive and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel ": God-with-us (Is 7,14). Isaiah's prophecy is of capital importance in the economy of salvation. It assures us that "God himself" will give King David a descendent as a "sign" of his fidelity. This promise was fulfilled by Jesus born of the Virgin Mary.

2. Thus to benefit from the meaning and gift of grace of Christmas, now at hand, we must hasten to the school of Our Lady and her husband Joseph whom we contemplate in ecstatic adoration of the newborn Messiah in the manger.
In today's Gospel passage, Matthew highlights the role of Joseph whom he describes as a "just" man (Mt 1,19), and thus emphasizes his unreserved devotion to fulfilling God's will. Precisely because of this inner righteousness, which in the ultimate analysis coincides with love, Joseph does not decide to reject Mary when he discovers she is with child. He resolves to "send her away quietly" (Mt 1,19), but the angel of the Lord tells him not to fear, and to take her as his wife.
Another essential aspect of St Joseph's personality emerges here: he is ready to listen to God in prayer. He learns from the angel that "it is through the Holy Spirit that this child has been conceived in her,[Mary]" (cf. Mt 1,20), according to the ancient prophecy: "Behold, a young woman shall conceive...", and he is quick to accept God's plans that surpass human limitations.

3. In sum, Joseph can be described as an authentic man of faith like his wife Mary. Faith combines justice and prayer; this is the most appropriate attitude with which to encounter the Emmanuel, God-with-us. Indeed, believing means living through history open to God's initiative, to the creative force of his Word who became flesh in Christ, uniting himself to our humanity forever. Thus, the Virgin Mary and St Joseph help us to celebrate fruitfully the birth of the Redeemer.
After praying the Angelus the Holy Father said:
I would like to make an appeal on behalf of those who have been kidnapped. I am thinking especially of those who were kidnapped because of their faith, and in particular of Fr Giuseppe Pierantoni, a Dehonian priest who was kidnapped more than two months ago in the Philippines.
May holy Christmas, a mystery of goodness and peace, move the kidnappers' hearts to pity and induce them to release these people. I assure them and their relatives of my remembrance in prayer.
I now greet warmly the pilgrims who have come here, especially the altar boys of the Roman Parish of St Mary Mother of Mercy, with their relatives and friends. To you all, my fervent good wishes for a Happy Christmas.
© Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Third Sunday of Advent
16 December 2001
  1. Today, on the Third Sunday of Advent, we hear again the joyful announcement, "rejoice in the Lord always" (Phil 4,4). They are words taken from the Letter of St Paul to the Philippians that sum up today's liturgy.
The invitation to joy has a definite motive: "the Lord is at hand" (Phil 4,5). It is a truth known to the pious Israelite, and from it he drew confidence and consolation; it is a truth that has in Christ its perfected foundation. "In him, in fact, God has drawn near to everyone:  He is the Messiah, the "Emmanuel", "God with us" (cf. Is 7,14; Mt 1,23). Joy is the heart of the Gospel of Christmas.
2. As an expert Mother, the Church knows better than any other institution the difficulties and sufferings that are part of the human condition. She knows well that in the life of many peoples and persons sadness prevails over joy, anxiety over hope.
It is particularly to these men and women that the Christmas message is proclaimed in a preferential way because "[Christ] brought the good news of salvation to the poor, to prisoners freedom, and to those in sorrow joy" (Fourth Eucharistic Prayer). He is the genuine liberator of the human person, sent by God to redeem him from the power of evil and death. The joy that Christ gives to his friends derives from this deep and integral liberation. It is a joy that, like his peace, is different from that of the world (cf. Jn 14,27) which is superficial and fleeting.
The serious problems surrounding human life sometimes make it difficult to recognize the gifts of Christ. The mission of the Church, that is coached by the Holy Spirit, is precisely that of making his gifts visible and of witnessing to their presence. Today humanity yearns especially for the gifts of joy and peace. It is our mission as believers, with the eloquence of love expressed in deeds, to become every day the prophetic ferment of a world reconciled by love and animated by divine joy.
3. May the Blessed Virgin Mary, whom we honour as the "Cause of our joy" help us to be faithful to this mission. Who more than she experienced the closeness of the Lord, source of joy and peace? We now entrust ourselves to her maternal protection in order to be at all times, but especially now, credible witnesses of the joy of Christ.
After the Angelus the Holy Father greeted the little children who have an annual appointment with the Holy Father in St Peter's Square to wish him Merry Christmas and to bring the baby Jesus who is to be placed in their cribs for the Holy Father's blessing. The Holy Father also greeted pilgrims from Pula and Zagreb, from Ljubljana, from Venice and Vicenza.
I greet warmly the great number of youngsters who according to tradition have come with the baby Jesus (bambinelli) whom they will place in their Christmas cribs. Young ones, thank you for your good wishes for a Happy Christmas and I also wish you best wishes for Christmas asking God to bless you and your families with peace and serenity. My thanks go to the Centre for Roman Oratories and to the Catholic schools of Rome, Pescara and Teramo, who organized this joyful meeting.
Today the Diocese of Rome in all the parishes is promoting the collection for the building of new churches in the outlying districts of the city. In many of these areas the people lack a Church where the they can pray, catechize and run other social activities. I ask you to share in this observance which benefits the entire city.
In particular today I wish to greet the Associates of the World Food Programme of the United Nations who have completed a global survey on the feeding of children at school. Hunger is a continuing tragedy for millions of people around the world, and the school feeding programme has proved to be a very effective way of fighting it and helping the world's poorest children. I pray that the international community will generously support your work, and upon your efforts I invoke Almighty God's blessings of strength and perseverance.
Merry Christmas!
© Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 9 December 2001
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. I have invited Catholics to take part in a day of fasting next Friday, 14 December, to implore God for a stable peace that is based on justice. This initiative has also found support among the faithful of other religions, particularly Jews and Muslims, as well as among many persons of good will.
In today's complex international situation, humanity is called to mobilize its best energies so that love may prevail over hatred, peace over war, truth over falsehood and forgiveness over revenge.

2. Peace or violence spring up in the human heart over which God alone has power. Convinced of this, believers have always used, against the most serious dangers, the weapons of fasting and prayer, along with concrete works of charity.
Fasting expresses sorrow for a serious misfortune, but also the intention of taking a certain responsibility by confessing our sins and being resolved to turn our hearts and actions to greater justice toward God and neighbour. By fasting, we acknowledge with confident humility that true personal and social renewal can only come from God, on whom we are all totally dependent. Beyond false forms of pietism or manipulative assistance, fasting makes it possible to share our daily bread with those who are without.
While I hope that the entire People of God will be able to fast next Friday in a spirit of faith, humility and meekness, I thank the diocesan pastors for the careful way in which they are preparing for this day in their communities.

3. This initiative has special meaning for us Christians, because we are in the season of Advent, a season of hope in which we are called to devote ourselves to preparing the way of the Lord, who has come into history as our Saviour and will return at the end of time as our merciful Judge.
Moreover, the date of 14 December coincides with the end of Ramadan, during which the followers of Islam express their submission to the One God through fasting. I fervently hope that our common attitude of religious repentance will increase reciprocal understanding between Christians and Muslims who are called, today more than ever, to build justice and peace together.
May the Virgin Mary, whose feast we solemnly celebrated yesterday and who is also venerated with deep admiration by Muslims, help us, and obtain peace for the whole world.
After leading the Angelus, the Holy Father expressed the hope that all countries would enforce legislation to protect refugees as they grow in number. He also mentioned the forthcoming Mass he would celebrate for university students in Rome.
Over the next few days, the representatives of 140 signatory States will meet in Geneva to reaffirm the Convention of 1951 on the "status" of refugees and its Protocol of 1967. I hope that all the nations will put into force legal protection for these persons, who are unfortunately very numerous and are forced to flee from their own countries, as well as for the so-called "internal refugees". May their common solicitude bring to an end the serious violations of human rights that are the origin of this forced movement.
In addition, the "European Forum of University Students" is taking place in Rome these days on the theme: "A Culture for Europe". As I greet the European university students who have gathered for this important meeting, I invite them to take part, together with their Roman colleagues, in the traditional Holy Mass I will be celebrating at 5: 00 p.m. next Tuesday, in St Peter's Basilica.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
SOLEMNITY OF THE IMMACULATE CONCEPTION
OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY
ANGELUS
Saturday, 8 December 2001
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today we celebrate the Solemnity of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary. We commemorate the extraordinary intervention by which the heavenly Father preserved from original sin the One who would become the Mother of his Son made man. Today the eyes of all believers look to Mary, who is radiant in glory in heaven in the midst of the assembly of the Saints.

Dante's thought in the 32nd canto of the third part of the Divine Comedy, Paradise, comes to mind. St Bernard, the final guide of Dante's journey beyond earth, directs the words to the pilgrim, "Now look upon the face that most resembles Christ, whose radiance alone can dispose you to see Christ" (Paradiso, canto 32, verses 85-87).
St Bernard invites us to contemplate the countenance of Mary, because more than any other creature, the Mother resembles her Son, Jesus. The splendour that radiates from her countenance can help Dante sustain the impact of the beatifying vision of the glorious face of Christ.

2. How precious is the exhortation of the holy Doctor for us pilgrims on earth while we commemorate with joy the "All Beautiful One"! The Immaculate Virgin however invites us not to fix our eyes on her but to pass beyond, and as much as possible, to enter into the mystery in which she was conceived: the mystery of God who is One and Three, full of grace and fidelity.
As the moon shines with the light of the sun, so the immaculate splendour of Mary is totally relative to that of the Redeemer. The Mother leads us to her Son; passing through her, we reach Christ. For this reason, Dante Allighieri notes fittingly: "that her radiance alone can dispose you to see Christ".
3. As I do every year, this afternoon I will go in pilgrimage with great joy to Piazza di Spagna, to join the traditional homage that the city of Rome pays to the Immaculate Virgin. To her I will again entrust the Church and mankind, in this critical moment of history.
To gain confidence and to discover the meaning of life, men and women need to meet Christ. The Virgin Mary is the sure guide to the source of light and love that is Jesus: she prepares us for the meeting with him. The Christian people have wisely understood this reality of salvation, and turning to the "All Holy" One, with filial confidence they say to her "and after this our exile show unto us the blessed fruit of your womb, Jesus. O clement, O loving, O sweet Virgin Mary".
After the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims and visitors and among them he greeted the members of the Pontifical Academy of the Immaculate One, accompaned by Cardinal Deskur.
With special fondness, I greet you dear members of the Pontifical Academy of the Immaculate One, accompanied by your beloved President, Cardinal Andrzej Maria Deskur. I was happy to learn that these days you have been reflecting on the Apostolic Letter Novo Millennio ineunte, paying special attention to the Church as "the home and school of communion" (n. 43). I thank you for this and for your contribution to the celebration of today's feast. May Our Lady be with you on your way!
I greet all the pilgrims who are present today. I warmly welcome the group Work of the Church (Opera della Chiesa), who are living a brotherly gathering in a spirit of great Marian devotion.
© Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II 
ANGELUS
Sunday, 2 December 2001
  Dearest Brothers and Sisters!
1. With today's first Sunday of Advent, a new liturgical year begins. The Church takes up her journey again, and invites us to reflect more intensely on the mystery of Christ, a mystery that is always new and that time cannot exhaust. Christ is the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the end. Thanks to him, the history of humanity proceeds as a pilgrimage toward the fulfilment of the Kingdom which he inaugurated with his Incarnation and victory over sin and death.
For this reason, Advent is synonymous with hope: not the vain waiting for a faceless god, but concrete and certain trust in the return of him who has already visited us, of the "Spouse" who with his blood has sealed with humanity a pact that is an eternal covenant. It is a hope that stimulates vigilance, the characteristic virtue of this special liturgical season. Vigilance in prayer, fostered by a loving expectation; vigilance in the dynamics of concrete charity, aware that the Kingdom of God comes close whenever men learn to live as brothers.
2. The Christian community begins Advent with these resolutions, keeping the spirit vigilant, the better to receive the message of the Word of God. In today's liturgy we hear the famous and wonderful oracle of the Prophet Isaiah, spoken at a time of crisis in the history of Israel. "In the days to come, the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established as the highest mountain and raised above the hills. All nations shall stream toward it;... they shall beat their swords into ploughshares and their spears into pruning hooks; one nation shall not raise the sword against another, nor shall they train for war again" (cf. Isaiah 2,1-5).

These words contain a promise of peace that is more urgent than ever for humanity and, in particular, for the Holy Land, from where even today, unfortunately, sad and worrying news reaches us. May the words of the Prophet Isaiah inspire the minds and hearts of believers and of all men and women of good will, so that the day of fasting on 14 December and the meeting in Assisi of the representatives of the world religions next 24 January will help to create a more serene and solidary climate in the world.
3. I entrust this invocation for peace to Mary, vigilant Virgin and Mother of hope. In a few days, with renewed faith we will celebrate the Solemnity of her Immaculate Conception. May she guide us on the way, helping every human person and nation to look to the "mountain of the Lord", an image of the final triumph of Christ and the advent of his Kingdom of peace.
After the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted pilgrims and visitors in Italian and Spanish. In Italian he promoted the UN Day of Disabled Persons and he greeted a special group of students from Catania. In Spanish, he greeted several parishes from Madrid and Cartagena, the Collegio Claret of Madrid and the Naval Academy of Ecuador.
Today we observe the Day of Disabled Persons promoted by the United Nations. Remembering the wonderful event of the Jubilee a year ago, I greet cordially all the persons who live with a handicap and I assure them of my spiritual closeness. I wish to show appreciation for every initiative that fosters their full and genuine social integration.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 25 November 2001
Solemnity of Christ the King
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
On this last Sunday of the liturgical year we are celebrating the Solemnity of Christ the King and the Church invites us to contemplate the kingship of the Redeemer that emerges very forcefully from the lives of the saints. This morning, in St Peter's Basilica, I had the joy of proclaiming four new saints:  Bishop Joseph Marello of Acqui, founder of the Congregation of the Oblates of St Joseph, and three consacrated virgins:  Paula Montal Fornés of Calasanz, Leonie Frances de Sales Aviat and Maria Crescenzia Höss.

Their witness shows that the Crucified One truly "lives and reigns for ever and ever". Yes, he is "the Living God", "the Lord" and he reigns in the lives of men and women of every place and time who accept him freely and follow him faithfully. His Kingdom, "a kingdom of justice, love, and peace" (Preface) will only be manifested fully at the end of time.
2. If it is assessed according to the criteria of this world, Jesus' kingship can appear "paradoxical". Indeed, the power he exercises does not fit into earthly logic. On the contrary, his is the power of love and service that requires the gratuitous gift of self and the consistent witness to the truth (cf. Jn 18,37).
This is why the Lord gave his life as "an immaculate victim of peace on the altar of the Cross" (Preface), knowing that only in this way could he redeem humanity, history and the cosmos from the slavery of sin and death. His Resurrection attests that he is the victorious King, the "Lord" in heaven and on earth and under the earth (cf. Phil 2,10-11).

3. The creature who more than any other is associated with Christ's kingship is Mary, whom he himself crowned Queen of heaven and earth. The saints the Church presents for our veneration today looked to her as their constant model. Let us also turn our eyes to her, so that she may help us "reign" with Christ to build a world where peace may "reign".
We must pray tirelessly to obtain this great gift that is peace: a gift for which humanity has so great a need. Let us also ask for it confidently along with the two projects I announced to you last Sunday:  the day of fasting in December, and the prayer meeting with the representatives of the world's religions in Assisi in January. May Mary, Queen of Peace, intercede for us with her divine Son, immortal King and Lord of peace.
After leading the prayer of the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims and faithful in various languages: 
I greet the bishops, the civil authorities, the Calasanz family and all the faithful who have taken part in the canonization of St Paula Montal Fornés. In this Marian prayer, I would like to recall her great love for the Blessed Virgin to whom she addressed her last words, spoken in her mother tongue:  "Mare, Mare meua". I encourage you all to imitate the new saint, finding in genuine devotion and love for the Virgin Mary the constant motivation for following Christ.
Dear French-speaking pilgrims, I extend a cordial greeting to you as I give thanks for the canonization of Mother Frances de Sales Aviat, whose life is an example to us all. She invites us to combine action and contemplation in our lives and humbly to do the will of God. May the Virgin Mary accompany you on your daily journey! With my Apostolic Blessing.
I warmly greet the pilgrims from Germany who came to Rome for the canonization of Sr Crescenzia Höss. There are many of the faithful from her birth- place, Kaufbeuren, in particular, but also from Bavaria. May the new saint be a powerful model and intercessor for you! I gladly impart my Apostolic Blessing to you.
I cordially greet the pilgrims from Poland and all my compatriots who have joined us in prayer via radio and television. I send a special greeting to the organizers and participants of the first National Congress of Catholic Action taking place in Poznan on the theme:  "Christ, Hope of the future". May the Son of God, whom today we celebrate as King, make this time of reflection and prayer inspire everyone with great apostolic enthusiasm. I wholeheartedly bless you all.
Today in Rome we are celebrating Seminaries Day. As I adress an affectionate greeting to the seminarians, I assure each of them of my special remembrance in prayer. At the same time, I express deep gratitude to all who offer spiritual and material support to the Roman Seminary, the heart of our diocese.
I greet with affection the Italian-speaking pilgrims, especially those who have taken part in the canonization of Bishop Joseph Marello.
I also greet the faithful from St Frances de Sales Parish in Rome, whom I encourage to continue faithfully in their Christian way of life.
© Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II 
ANGELUS
Sunday, 18 November 2001
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The international scene continues to be disturbed by worrisome tensions. We cannot forget the intense sufferings that have afflicted and still afflict so many of our brothers and sisters in the world:  thousands of innocent victims in the deadly attacks of 11 September; countless people forced to abandon their homes to face the unknown and sometimes a cruel death; women, the elderly and children exposed to the risk of dying of cold and hunger.
In a situation made dramatic by the ever present threat of terrorism, we feel the need to cry out to God. The more insurmountable the difficulties and obscure the prospects, the more insistent must our prayer be, to beg of God the gift of mutual understanding, harmony and peace.

2. We know that prayer aquires power if it is joined with fasting and almsgiving. The Old Testament taught this, and from the earliest centuries Christians have accepted and applied this lesson, especially at the times of Advent and Lent. For their part, the Muslim faithful have just begun Ramadan, a month dedicated to fasting and prayer. Soon, we Christians will begin Advent, to prepare ourselves in prayer, for the celebration of Christmas, the day of the birth of "the Prince of Peace".
At this appropriate time, I ask Catholics to make next 14 December a day of fasting, to pray fervently to God to grant to the world stable peace based on justice, and make it possible to find adequate solutions to the many conflicts that trouble the world. May what is saved by fasting be put at the disposal of the poor, especially those who at present suffer the consequences of terrorism and war.

I would also like to announce that it is my intention to invite the representatives of the world religions to come to Assisi on 24 January 2002, to pray for the overcoming of opposition and the promotion of authentic peace. In particular, we wish to bring Christians and Muslims together to proclaim to the world that religion must never be a reason for conflict, hatred and violence. In this historic moment, humanity needs to see gestures of peace and to hear words of hope.
As I said 15 years ago, when announcing the meeting of prayer for peace, which was held in Assisi the following October:  "It is urgent that a common invocation rise to heaven from earth, to beg from Almighty God, in whose hands is the destiny of the world, the great gift of peace, the necessary condition  for  every  serious  endeavour at the service of humanity's real progress".

3. From this moment I entrust these initiatives to the maternal intercession of the Blessed Virgin Mary, asking her to sustain our efforts and those of humanity in order to achieve peace.
We ask you, Queen of Peace, to help us respond with the power of truth and love to the new and unsettling challenges of the present moment. Help us also to pass through this difficult period, that disturbs the serenity of so many people, and to work without delay to build every day and everywhere a genuine culture of peace.
After the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims in French and Italian.

He recalled in French that Sunday was World Day for the Victims of the Road and begged the mercy of God for all those who lost their lives in automobile accidents. He also prayed for those who survived accidents with lasting serious injuries. and for their families who have to take care of them. He also prayed that those who drive might have a sense of prudence and responsibility and be careful to respect others.
In Italian the Holy Father called attention to the observance in Italy of the Day of Migration, an annual observance intended to help us face the fact of human mobility with a sense of responsibility. He hoped that the observance would foster a spirit of solidarity so that the world would accept becoming a family united in diversity. He greeted the ethnic groups in Rome and in Italy and those who are dedicated to the service of the immigrants.
He also mentioned the National Day for Cancer Research observed to inform the public and to call for a reflection on the relationship between the person, science and technology. He encouraged those involved in such research and assured the sick and their families of his prayers. Last of all, he greeted the pilgrims who belong to the social cooperative, "Il Cammino" of the city of San Remo. He asked them to continue helping young people in difficulty to find their place again at work and in society. May the Gospel be the light and the golden guide for their work.
© Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 11 November 2001
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today Italy is celebrating the traditional Day of Thanksgiving for the fruits of the earth and human labour. At the moment of the Offertory at Mass, the Christian community gives thanks to the Lord, God of the universe, from whose goodness we receive the bread and wine destined to become the Body and Blood of Christ. Today's celebration focuses on this dimension of offering, inviting us to remember that divine Providence is the first source of life and well-being.
This year the Italian Bishops have taken the words of the "Our Father" as the theme of the Day: "Give us this day our daily bread ". When teaching this prayer to the disciples, Christ asked them to trust in the goodness of God the Father, who rejoices to give all creatures, especially human beings, what is necessary for life. At the same time, having us say "today" and "daily" reminds us that this gift must not be taken for granted, but must always be asked for and received in a spirit of thanksgiving.
Moreover, it is important that Christ taught us to ask for "our" bread, and not that each one ask for "his" own. This means that children of the same Father are co-responsible for the "bread" of all, so that everyone may live in dignity and together with the others thank the Lord.

2. As we thank God for all that the fields produced this year, we must not forget those brothers and sisters in different parts of the world who are deprived of essential goods, such as food, water, a home and health care. At this time of great international concern, I am thinking especially of the peoples of Afghanistan, who must urgently receive necessary aid. This is a world emergency, which, however, does not allow us to forget that in other parts of the world there continue to be conditions of great and compelling need.
3. In the face of these situations, it is not enough to think of extraordinary initiatives. The commitment to justice calls for a real change in lifestyle, especially in affluent societies, as well as a more equitable management of resources, in both rich and poor countries. Indeed, the present enormous imbalances spark conflicts and irreversibly threaten the earth, air and water that God has entrusted to human stewardship.
May Our Lady help the whole human family to understand that the earth's resources are a gift of the Lord to be used for the good of all.
    © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
         
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday 4 November 2001
  1. At the end of the Mass we are full of gratitude, because the Lord does not cease to raise up strong witnesses of the Gospel among His people. Today we celebrate the memory of St Charles Borromeo. I thank Cardinal Bernardin Gantin for the warm words and good wishes that he addressed to me, in the name of all those present, at the beginning of this Celebration. I wish to take this occasion to thank all of those who have offered to me their best wishes for my name-day celebration, and I exchange these wishes, with all my heart, with prayer, which I offer especially for those who carry the name of the great Bishop of Milan.

I warmly welcome the Italian-speaking pilgrims, who have come in great numbers to pay homage to the new Blesseds, among whom there are four Italians. My dears, follow the "high standard" of Christian life, that they showed everyone through their splendid witness.

2. At this moment of the Angelus, I want to remember St Charles Borromeo, whose memory we celebrate today. To my heavenly patron, I offer in homage the beatification of his intimate friend and confidant, Bartholomew of the Martyrs. I take this occasion also to greet and thank the representation from Portugal present at this ceremony, that honoured one of its most important Pastors.

3. I now greet the Bishops, the civil authorities, the religious of the Missionary Work of Jesus and Mary, along with all of the faithful who have had the joy of participating in this solemn ceremony of beatification, in which Mother María Pilar Izquierdo was raised to the honours of the altar. Through her intercession may you always be inspired to work, with generosity and love, in the service of all, without being stopped by difficulties.

4. I give a warm welcome to the Slovak pilgrims. In a special way I greet the President of the Slovak Republic, Mr Rudolf Schuster. Dear Brothers and Sisters, the beatification of the martyrs Bishop Pavel Peter Gojdic and the Redemptorist Methodius Dominic Trcka, is a time of joy for you. I exhort you to follow their example of faith and charity and I implore their protection for the beloved Slovak people.

5. I extend a warm greeting to the Czech pilgrims, who are here to participate in the solemn beatification of Methodius Dominic Trcka, native of Frýdland nad Ostravici, in Moravia. I entrust all of you here present, together with your entire beloved Nation, to the heavenly protection of this new Blessed, exhorting you to follow his heroic example of faithfulness to the Gospel, service to the Church, and devotion to his brothers.

6. We express our gratitude as sons and daughters to the Blessed Mother, contemplating her at the centre of the immense choir of Saints and Blesseds. Thanks to her maternal guidance, each of them finished their earthly journey, reaching, through many trials, the glory of heaven.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
SOLEMNITY OF ALL SAINTS
ANGELUS
Thursday 1 November 2001
  Dear Brothers and Sisters in Christ,
Today we celebrate the Solemnity of All Saints. In the light of God, we remember all those who witnessed to Christ during their earthly life, doing their best to put into practice his teachings. We rejoice with these brothers and sisters who have gone ahead of us travelling the same path that we must take and now enjoy their merited reward in the glory of heaven.

They are the ones who, as the Apocalypse describes it, "have passed through the great tribulation and have washed their garments and made them white in the blood of the Lamb" (Apoc 7,14).
They knew how to go against the tide, accepting the Sermon on the Mount (cf. Mt 5,3-10) as the norm that guided their lives: poverty of spirit and simplicity of life, meekness and non-violence; repentance for their sins and expiation of the sins of others; hunger and thirst for justice; mercy and compassion; purity of heart; dedication to making peace; sacrifice for justice (cf. Mt 5,3-10).
Every Christian is called to holiness, that is, to live the beatitudes. Some are examples for all; the Church points to the brothers and sisters who are pre-eminent in virtue and have become instruments of divine grace. Today we celebrate them all together, so that with their help we can grow in the love of God and be the "salt of the earth and light of the world" (cf. Mt 5,13-14).

2. The communion of saints crosses over the portal of death. It is a communion that has its centre in God, the God of the living (cf. Mt 22,32). "Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord henceforth" (Apoc 14,13), we read in the Book of the Apocalypse. The feast of All Saints sheds light on the reason for the Commemoration of All the Faithful Departed which we will celebrate tomorrow. It is a day of prayer and of serious reflection on the mystery of life and death. "God did not make death", affirms Scripture, but "created all to exist" (Wis 1,13-14). "Through the devil's envy death entered the world and those who belong to his party experience it" (Wis 2,24).
The Gospel reveals that Jesus Christ has an absolute power over physical death, that he considered it to be a sleep (Mt 9,24-25; Lk 7,14-15; Jn 11,11). There is another death that Jesus suggests we should fear: the death of the soul, which on account of sin loses the divine life of grace, and is excluded definitively from life and happiness.
3. God wants all men to be saved (cf. 1 Tim 2,4). For this reason he sent His Son on earth (cf. Jn 3,16), so that every man might have life "abundantly" (cf. Jn 10,10). Our heavenly Father is not resigned to losing any of his children, but he wants them with him, holy and immaculate in love (cf. Eph 1,4).
We are to be holy and immaculate like the Blessed Virgin Mary, the supreme model of the new humanity. Her happiness in the glory of God is full. She shines as the goal to which we all are tending. To Her we entrust our deceased brothers and sisters, whom we hope to meet again in the house of the Father.
After the Angelus the Holy Father promised his prayers for all the dead: especially, for his predecessors in the Papacy, for the recent victims of violence and those who have suffered out of faithfulness to Christ.
This evening I will descend into the crypt of St Peter's to pray near the tombs of my Predecessors who are buried there. Spiritually, I will visit in pilgrimage the cemeteries of the world, where they sleep who have gone before us with the sign of faith and await the day of the resurrection.
I will pray for the many victims of violence and especially the recent ones. I will remember those who have sacrificed their lives in order to be faithful to the end to Christ. Our prayer for them must include the prayer to the Lord to grant comfort and peace to those in sorrow for the tragic loss of their loved ones. May the blessing of Almighty God descend upon all.
    © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday 28 October 2001
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The 10th Ordinary Assembly of the Synod of Bishops ended yesterday with a solemn concelebrated Mass in St Peter's Basilica. For four weeks, numerous bishops from around the world met to discuss an essential aspect of the life of the Church:  the ministry of the bishop, "Servant of the Gospel of Jesus Christ for the Hope of the World".

I personally participated in the Synod meetings, feeling the atmosphere of communion that characterized them and listening with great interest to the ideas proposed. In fact, the Second Vatican Ecumenical Council had already given much space to the subject of the bishop and his ecclesial service. However, such teaching had to be studied further and adjusted as needed to the rapid development of time and situations.
In this perspective the synod, the first of the third millennium, looked to the future, analyzing the pastoral challenges that the new times pose to the Church. The bishops have confirmed their will to "cast the nets out" trusting in the word of Christ who said to them, "Put out into the deep!" (cf. Lk 5,4-5).

2. It is quite significant that the assembly took place in the month of October, which is the month of the missions. Giving great emphasis to the pastoral nature of the service of the bishop, it did not fail to underline the principal duty of the bishop to stimulate the missionary spirit and action of the whole ecclesial community, particularly of the laity. In fact, the mission of the church calls for the active and responsible participation of all, according to the different gifts and states of life.
The abundant harvest in the fields of the world has a growing need of labourers, of missionary vocations. The Lord invites us to ask the Lord of the harvest for the gift with assiduous prayer (cf. Mt 9,37-38). The human family urgently needs missionary men and women who, united to God and in solidarity with their brothers, take the Gospel message everywhere, the proclamation of salvation for all men, regardless of language, ethnicity or culture.
3. The month of October is coming to an end, during which we expressed our Marian devotion with particular fervour by reciting the rosary, to beg the Lord for peace. At this time, we entrust to the maternal protection of the Blessed Virgin Mary the peoples of Afghanistan: May innocent lives be spared, and may the international community give timely and effective help to so many refugees, exposed to privations of every sort as the winter season approaches.
Nor can we forget all those who continue to suffer violence and death in the Holy Land, particularly in the Holy Places, so dear to the Christian faith. May Mary, Queen of Peace, help all to lay down their arms and finally begin resolutely on the path toward a just and lasting peace.
After the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the directors, teachers and students of the Catholic schools of Rome who with Cardinal Ruini were present in the square as part of the celebration of the Diocesan Day for Catholic Schools. The Holy Father also greeted Spanish-speaking visitors who belong to the Dante Alighieri Association in Cordoba, Argentina. He also greeted those taking part in the Third International Meeting of "Missionary Infancy" of the countries of the Mediterranean and of Eastern Europe with some representatives of the Holy Land. He thanked them for educating children to the missionary spirit and to a spirit of solidarity with their contemporaries throughout the world.
About the Catholic schools, the Pope said:
"I invite the Christian and civil society to support Catholic schools in their needs so that they may offer to all and in the best possible way their cultural and social service". 
He also thanked the religious who run the schools and the religious who teach in them for their important contribution to the good of society.
© Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II 
ANGELUS
Sunday 21 October 2001
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today we celebrate World Mission Sunday, which Pope Pius XI instituted 75 years ago. It reminds the entire People of God of the perennial timeliness of the mission entrusted by Christ to his Church to proclaim the Gospel to all nations (cf. Mt 28,19). This mandate acquired the greatest urgency at the beginning of the third millennium, if we think of the great multitude of humanity that still does not know or recognize Christ. Therefore, today the mission "ad gentes" to all peoples is more necessary than ever.

Unfortunately, at this time we are living in the midst of threatening situations, which make the whole of humanity anxious. With great sadness I received the painful and distresssing news of Bethlehem, and of the cities of Beit Jala and Beit Sahour. War and death even reached the square of the Basilica of the Nativity of Our Lord. In the name of God I repeat once again:  Violence is only a way of death and destruction, and it dishonours the holiness of God and the dignity of man.
To the families that are victims of violence, I express my closeness in sorrow, prayer and hope.
They have the gift of living in the land that is holy for Jews, Christians and Muslims. All must be determined to make it, finally, a land of peace and fraternity.

2. The Church responds to the negative manifestations in the world by reinforcing her dedication to proclaiming Christ, the hope of man and of the world!
In this mission of hope, a primary role is entrusted to families. Indeed, the family proclaims the Gospel of hope by its very composition, because it is founded on mutual confidence and faith in Providence. The family proclaims hope, because it is the place where life emerges and grows, in the generous and responsible exercise of fatherhood and motherhood. An authentic family, founded on marriage, is in itself "good news" for the world.
Moreover, in our time the families that collaborate actively in evangelization are ever more numerous, either in their own parish or diocese, or by participating in the mission "ad gentes" itself. Yes, dear families, the hour of the family has arrived in the Church, which is also the hour of the missionary family. It is confirmed by today's beatification of the spouses Luigi Beltrame Quattrocchi and Maria Corsini. We especially entrust the missionary dedication of Christian families to their intercession, united to that of the Blessed Virgin Mary.
3. We do this before the image of Our Lady of Loreto, who yesterday and today has been among us, helping us to appreciate the maternal presence of the Virgin more concretely and to relive the spirit of the Holy Family of Nazareth. In this same spirit, we now recite the Angelus prayer.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 14 October 2001
  Dearest Brothers and Sisters,
1. Last Sunday we celebrated the feast of Our Lady of the Rosary. The whole month of October is dedicated to this beautiful prayer, which the Christian people love. On account of the present international situation, I have invited individuals and communities to pray the rosary for peace. I also renew this appeal today, underlining at the same time that the rosary is the contemplation of Christ in his mysteries, in close union with the Blessed Virgin Mary.
Contemporary spirituality feels the intense need, so to speak, to focus on the essential. Because of this, there is at present a promising rediscovery of the true nature of the rosary, as a prayer that helps us to stay in Christ's company, to know him better, assimilate his teaching, and live his Mysteries. And who, better than Mary, can accompany us in this journey of the mind and heart? This is why we repeat the Hail Mary, which "constitutes the warp on which the contemplation of the mysteries develops" (Apostolic Exhortation Marialis Cultus, n. 46).
May a constant prayer for peace rise in the Church with the praying of the rosary, both by individuals or by communities, keeping our gaze fixed on Jesus Christ, our peace.
2. The recitation of the rosary used to be very much practised in families, especially at the end of the day. This is what the spouses Luigi and Maria Beltrame Quattrocchi did daily, and next Sunday I will have the joy of proclaiming them Blessed.
On that occasion, which coincides with the 20th anniversary of the Apostolic Exhortation Familiaris Consortio, the Italian Church has called a congress on the topic "The Family: Social Subject". I express my appreciation for this initiative and I hope that the family will once again be central to Italian society.
Next Saturday afternoon, Christian families are invited to a gathering for reflection and prayer in St Peter's Square. The next day, Sunday, the culminating moment with the solemn beatification of the two spouses will take place. It coincides with World Mission Sunday. It will be an apt occasion to highlight the role of families in the evangelizing mission of the Church.
3. While we recite the Angelus prayer together, let us remember the meeting of the Synod of Bishops, which is being held in the Vatican. We entrust to the Virgin all the missionaries of the Gospel and implore for them the strength to be builders of justice and peace. Such prayer for peace is taking place throughout the world, in this hour charged with great concern. Let us join in fervent prayer to the Lord through the intercession of Mary, Queen of Peace.
After praying the Angelus with the faithful the Holy Father addressed the Polish pilgrims:
I am grateful to learn that the Polish Bishops' Conference has responded to the proposal of the Foundation Dzie³o nowego tysiaclecia (Work of the new millennium), by proclaiming the Sunday before 16 October a day of prayer for the Pope and of reflection on his ministry in the Church. I have always counted on the spiritual support of my countrymen and I have always obtained it. For my part, I reciprocate their kindness before the Lord by asking him for every good that Poland and the Polish need. Please stay united with me in this communion of prayer.
I know that the lovely idea of supporting young Poles in financial straits is linked to this day. Under the slogan "Dzielmy sie mi³osia" (We share in love), their peers - scouts and the members of Catholic Action - collect funds that will be used for this purpose. I thank the organizers, artists and all who are dedicated to this project.
May the "Papal Day" bring all Poles deep spiritual experiences and abundant fruits of grace. God bless you!
    © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday 7 October 2001
  A National Day of Prayer for Peace is being celebrated today in Colombia, this beloved country which for some years has been suffering a situation that gives rise to serious social concern with a series of assassinations, kidnappings and other acts of violence. I wholeheartedly join in this prayer, asking God to help us overcome divisions and clashes and to advance towards lasting peace, with the release of the kidnapped and the establishing of a sincere dialogue that will restore brotherhood and solidarity among the sons and daughters of Colombia.

I greet you, dear pilgrims who have come from various countries for today's beatifications. May these new figures of holiness, especially Archbishop Maloyan and Sr Emilie Gamelin, help you to become holy in your own lives, witnessing eloquently every day to your love for Christ and for your brothers and sisters, especially the poorest!

I extend an affectionate greeting to the pilgrims who have come to Rome for the beatification from the Dioceses of Essen and Münster. May the example of both Blesseds give you the strength and hope to serve God and man in your daily lives. May the Queen of Peace, together with all the saints and blesseds, be a powerful intercessor for you. I willingly impart my Apostolic Blessing to you all.

To the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors present for today's beatifications, I renew my appeal to make the Rosary a daily prayer for peace during this month of October. Upon you and your families I invoke the Lord's abundant blessings.

I affectionately greet the Italian-speaking pilgrims and thank them for their witness of devotion to the new Blesseds.
For the victims of the plane crash above the Black Sea:
I would like, at this time, to recall the victims of the air disaster that happened three days ago above the Black Sea. I pray to the Lord to give them eternal rest and to comfort those who mourn their tragic death. Let us now entrust all human suffering to the intercession of Blessed Mary, reciting the Angelus together.
    © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II 
ANGELUS
Sunday 30 September 2001
  Dearest Brothers and Sisters!
1. In St Peter's Basilica we have celebrated the Eucharist for the opening of the working sessions of the 10th Ordinary General Assembly of the Synod of Bishops. This important ecclesial meeting will continue throughout the month of October, the month dedicated to the missions, which makes it a good month to reflect on the mission of the bishops in the challenge of the new evangelization.
2. October is the month in which we honour Our Blessed Mother, Queen of the Holy Rosary. In the present international situation, I appeal to all - individuals, families and communities - to pray the rosary for peace, even daily, so that the world will be preserved from the dreadful scourge of terrorism. The terrible tragedy of last 11 September will be remembered as a dark day in the history of humanity. In the face of this event, the Church intends to be faithful to her prophetic charism and reminds all men of their duty to build a future of peace for the human family. Of course, peace is not separate from justice, but the latter must always be carried out with mercy and love.
We cannot forget that Jews, Christians and Muslims adore the One God. Therefore, the three religions have the vocation to unity and peace. May God grant to the faithful of the Church to be in the front line in the search for justice, in the rejection of violence, and in the commitment to be agents of peace. May the Blessed Virgin Mary, Queen of Peace, intercede for the whole world, so that hatred and death may never have the last word!

3. I now turn in thought to Italian families, as the day of the meeting approaches that will be held in St Peters' Square on Saturday 20 and Sunday 21 October, on the occasion of the beatification of the spouses Luigi and Maria Beltrame Quattrocchi. Dear families, for the first time two spouses attain together, as a couple, the goal of beatification, and for such a happy occasion I expect many to be present. This event is taking place 20 years after the publication of the Apostolic Exhortation "Familiaris Consortio", which accentuated the role of the family, which in present-day society is especially downplayed. In Italy also, where the family has always been the point of reference and fundamental resource, disintegrative tendencies are growing and many groups are at work to equate the institution of the family based on matrimony with other forms of living together. This is why families and their associations must promote a revival of commitment for an effective fostering of family values.
May Mary, whom we are about to invoke in reciting the Angelus, grant the multiple intentions of our prayer today.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
PASTORAL VISIT IN KAZAKHSTAN 
ANGELUS
Astana – Square of the Motherland

Sunday, 23 September 2001
  At the end of this solemn celebration, let us recite together the customary Marian prayer, turning with confidence to Our Lady of Perpetual Help. The Astana Cathedral which can be seen from this Square is dedicated to her; and there tomorrow morning, God willing, I will celebrate Holy Mass for the priests, religious and seminarians.
At this moment, I wish to go on spiritual pilgrimage to your national Marian shrine near Oziornoe where you, dear Brothers and Sisters, venerate the Blessed Virgin under the title of Queen of Peace. Prostrate at her feet, I pray for the entire nation of Kazakhstan: for its leaders and citizens, for the families, the young people, the children and the elderly, for those who are suffering and those in need.
To Mary I entrust all of you: Christians and non-Christians, believers and non-believers. She is the Mother of all, because Christ her Son is the Saviour of all. May Mary help all of you, dear Brothers and Sisters, to accomplish in your daily lives Christ’s command: "Love one another", which is the guiding theme of this pastoral visit of mine.
To the perpetual help of the Queen of peace I also entrust the countries bordering Kazakhstan, and I greet especially the pilgrims who have come today from those lands to demonstrate their faith and affection.
Together let us turn now with confidence to the Handmaid of the Lord:
"Angelus Domini..."
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the Kazakhs, Poles, German-speaking faithful and others in each one's language:
A special greeting to all those present of Kazakh origin.
May the Almighty protect you and guide your steps towards an ever more prosperous future.
May the Blessed Virgin Mary take you and your families under her mantle.
I cordially greet all my compatriots, who are taking part in this liturgy, and all the Poles who live in Kazakhstan.
I look at you with great joy and thank God for granting me to be among you. I have always been deeply interested in your lot. The unforgettable Fr W³adys³aw Bukowinski, whom I met many times and whom I always admired for his priestly fidelity and enthusiasm often used to tell me about you. He had special ties with Karaganda but he told me about your lives.
I would like to assure you that I never forget you in my heart. In prayer, every day, I entrust to the goodness of God, you and the entire Church of Kazakhstan. Today I thank him for you, for he has continuously granted you the power of the Holy Spirit through which you have preserved your ancestors' faith, despite trials and persecution of various kinds. To you, too, my heartfelt thanks for your fidelity to Christ and to the Church. Please persevere in bearing this witness.
I entrust your future to the Blessed Mother. May it be fruitful and happy, built up in a spirit of reciprocal love. May the Good Lord grant you the abundance of his blessings!
Once again I greet Bishop Tomasz Peta, Apostolic Administrator of Astana; Bishop Jan Pawe³ Lenga of Karaganda; Bishop Theophilus Howaniec, Apostolic Administrator of Almaty, Bishop Vasyl Medvit of the Greek Catholic Church and Rev. Janusz Kaleta, Apostolic Administrator of Atyrau. I greet the superiors of the missions sui iuris, and all the prelates present here with the Apostolic Nuncio first of all, and then the Bishops who have come from Russia, Bielorus, Ukraine, Lithuania and Poland.
I extend special greetings to the diocesan priests and to the men and women religious. Dear brothers and sisters, Christ has entrusted to your care this beloved people who are scattered over Kazakhstan's vast territory. I know what efforts and self-denial you need to carry out your pastoral ministry properly in these unusual conditions. I also know how dedicated and faithful you are in your service to your brethren here. I warmly thank you for your efforts and for your spirit of sacrifice. May the power of the Holy Spirit accompany you constantly and support you in this great work that you are doing here. God be with you! (Szczesc Boze!).
I also welcome the pilgrims of Uzbekistan, Tadzykistan, Khyrgistan, Turkmenistan and from other countries, who have come for this meeting. I impart my blessing to you all.
Dear German-speaking brothers and sisters, I would also like to greet you and am delighted that you have come to his Holy Mass. It was wonderful to pray and sing together.
In the past years you have lived through many changes. You have been through difficult times, but with God's help and your human effort, you have succeeded in improving the tenor of your life in your vast country.
I gladly express my gratitude for your commitment and concern.
You will benefit your country by remaining faithful to it and by being involved in its political and social life. As Christians, you must try to give your society a face. What Jesus said to his disciples also applies to you:  "You are the salt of the earth. You are the light of the world" (Mt 5, 13ff.).
May the Virgin Mary, Star of Evangelization, guide your mission and accompany you along the way.
I cordially impart my Apostolic Blessing to you.
The Holy Father greeted pilgrims in Hungarian. Then in Russian he greeted those who came from Russia.
I cordially greet my brothers and sisters of the Orthodox Church. I thank you for your presence and for your common prayer.
* * *
Then in English the Holy Father made a special appeal for peace.
From this city, from Kazakhstan, a country that is an example of harmony between men and women of different origins and beliefs, I wish to make an earnest call to everyone, Christians and the followers of other religions, to work together to build a world without violence, a world that loves life, and grows in justice and solidarity. We must not let what has happened lead to a deepening of divisions. Religion must never be used as a reason for conflict.
From this place, I invite both Christians and Muslims to raise an intense prayer to the One, Almighty God whose children we all are, that the supreme good of peace may reign in the world. May people everywhere, strengthened by divine wisdom, work for a civilization of love, in which there is no room for hatred, discrimination or violence.
With all my heart I beg God to keep the world in peace. Amen.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
 PASTORAL VISIT OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL II IN FROSINONE
ANGELUS
Sunday, 16 September 2001
  1. As this solemn celebration draws to a close, I want to thank you again, Brothers and Sisters in Christ, for your warm reception. Your city, which in the past my venerable predecessors visited, and especially, Blessed Pius IX who stayed here during two visits for a few days each time, has today opened its arms and heart to me. Thank you for your cordial welcome. Thank you for the symbolic gift you have given me in the name of the 5 vicariates of the Diocese. To remember this wonderful visit, in each of them there will be a counselling centre with a house that will welcome persons in trouble. May the Lord reward your generosity and make you witnesses of his goodness, especially toward those in need and suffering.

2. I place your resolutions for good and your pastoral plan for the Diocese in the hands of Our Blessed Mother whom you love and venerate with deep-seated devotion. To Our Lady I entrust everyone who lives in this region, blessed with so many churches dedicated to her. How many are the titles with which you honour and call upon Mary. They form a rich litany which witnesses in impressive fashion to the faith you received from your fathers:  Our Lady of Grace, Our Lady of Suffrage, Our Lady of Good Health, Our Lady of the Holy Spirit, Our Lady of Mt Carmel, Our Lady of the Snows, Our Lady of Hope....
Yes, your Ciociaria is a Marian region, that in past centuries found support in the heavenly Mother of God. May the Blessed Virgin continue to be the luminous Star of your life, the hope that leads you to "Christ our hope".

3. May the Blessed Virgin bring comfort and hope to those who suffer on account of the tragic attack of the terrorists, that last week seriously harmed the beloved American people. To all the children of this great Nation I direct my heartbroken and heartfelt consideration. May Mary welcome the dead, console the survivors, support those families who are particularly tried, help all to resist the temptation to hatred and violence, and to dedicate themselves to the service of justice and peace.
May the Virgin Mary nourish in the hearts of all young persons, above all, high human and spiritual ideals and the necessary perseverance to achieve them. May She remind them of the primacy of eternal values, especially in these difficult moments, so that in their daily engagements and activities they may ever continue to be turned toward God and to his kingdom of solidarity and peace.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday 9 September 2001
  Dearest Brothers and Sisters!
1. Today I would like to ask you to pray for some important ecclesial events, which will take place in the near future. I refer, first of all, to the brief but intense pastoral visit that, God willing, I will have the joy of undertaking next Sunday morning, in the Diocese of Frosinone-Veroli-Ferentino. It will be a great pleasure for me to meet with the people of Ciociaria, to whom I already send my warm greetings.

On Saturday, 22 September, I will leave on an apostolic journey, which will take me to Kazakhstan and Armenia, two republics of the former Soviet Union, which became independent 10 years ago. Kazakhstan, one of the first countries of the world, in terms of size, is on the border of the European and Asian continents, and its population includes more than 100 ethnic groups and different cultures.
Armenia is homeland to one of the most ancient peoples of the Near East, who embraced Christianity officially some 17 centuries ago, and is the depository of a religious and cultural heritage of singular richness. I very much hope that my visits will contribute to the cause of the new evangelization and the ecumenical dialogue.

2. Then, from 30 September to 27 October, the 10th General Ordinary Assembly of the Synod of Bishops will be held in the Vatican, to reflect on the ministry of the bishop in the Church and the world today. "The Bishop, Servant of the Gospel of Jesus Christ for the Hope of the World" is the topic chosen for this meeting, of great importance for the whole Church, which will see bishops from all the continents converge on Rome.
Vatican Council II, which has amply illustrated the pastoral office of the pastors in the decree "Christus Dominus", will be the principal point of reference for the synod's work. The Conciliar teaching will be reread in light of the last decades and, especially, in the perspective of the new evangelization, as the topic itself suggests. The bidding of the Gospel "Duc in altum - Put out into the deep" (Lk 5,6), which I have proposed as the motto for the beginning of the new millennium, is addressed first of all to bishops, the Apostles' successors, and calls them to be dedicated with confidence to this new missionary season of the Church.
3. For each one of these meetings and for the entire life of the Church, we invoke the distinctive assistance of the Blessed Virgin Mary, whose Birthday we celebrated yesterday. As the Star of evangelization and Queen of the Apostles, may the Blessed Virgin watch over all believers and obtain for each one the abundance of the gifts of the Holy Spirit.
After the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims in French, English, German, Spanish, Portuguese and Italian. To the English pilgrims he said: 
I extend a special greeting to the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors, especially to the group from Ireland. I commend your dear country to Our Lady Queen of Peace. God bless you all!
To the Italians, he greeted in a particular way the Bridgettine Sisters, who came to Rome to celebrate the 90th anniversary of the foundation of their congregation:  
"I wish each one, especially the newly professed, to live their lives in conformity with the teachings of the Mother foundress".
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 2 September 2001
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. With the beginning of September, we resume the ordinary rhythm of our daily life. After our summer break, we begin again our various activities and a new school year, which starts very soon.
In this context a biblical expression found in the Book of Sirach, which we heard in the liturgy today, is particularly noteworthy:  "My son, perform your tasks in meekness; then you will be loved by those whom God accepts. The greater you are, the more you must humble yourself so you will find favour in the sight of the Lord" (Sir 3,17-18).
This is a concept that plainly goes against the tide. In fact, the mentality of the world incites one to stand out, to get ahead, with cunning and a lack of scruples, asserting oneself and one's own interests. In the Kingdom of God, however, it is the humble and the modest who are rewarded. On the contrary, in earthly affairs, often social climbing and arrogance win out; all can see the consequences:  rivalries, abuse of power and frustration.

2. The Word of the Lord helps us to see things in the right way, which is that of eternity. In the Gospel this Sunday, Christ says, "Everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, and he who humbles himself will be exalted" (Lk 14,11). He, himself, the Son of God made man, followed consistently the path of humility, spending the greater part of his earthly life in the hidden life of Nazareth, alongside the Virgin Mary and St Joseph, doing the work of a carpenter.
Jesus lived the exhortation of the ancient wise man: "Son, perform your tasks in meekness.... The greater you are, the more you must humble yourself" (Sir 3,17-18). In this way he has wished to say to everyone of every time that superficiality and social climbing, even if they obtain an immediate success, do not contribute to the real good of the human being and society. Indeed, the Kingdom of God is prepared effectively by people who do their work seriously and honestly, not aspiring to things that are too high, but turning to those that are lowly in daily faithfulness (cf. Rom 12,16).

3. To carry out his universal plan of salvation, God "looked upon his handmaid in her lowliness" (Lk 1,48), the Blessed Virgin Mary. While we prepare to celebrate in a few days the feast of the Nativity of Mary, let us confidently invoke her, so that every activity, professional or in the home, may be done in an atmosphere of genuine humanity, thanks to the humble and positive contribution of each one.
After the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims and visitors in French, English, German, Spanish, Portuguese and Italian. To the English speaking, he offered this wish.
I am pleased to greet the new students from the Rome Campus of the University of Dallas. May the Holy Spirit grant you wisdom and spiritual insight as you explore the religious and artistic heritage of the Eternal City. Upon all the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors I invoke Mary's maternal care and intercession. God bless you all.
To French speaking pilgrims, he extended the greeting.
I address a cordial welcome to all the Francophone pilgrims. May Christ our Saviour draw you to follow him on the path of humility so you can place yourselves at the service of the poorest with whom the Lord himself wished to be identified. To all I grant the Apostolic Blessing.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday 26 August 2001
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. "I come to gather nations of every language; they shall come and see my glory" (Is 66,18). The word of the prophet Isaiah, which we hear in the liturgy today, makes me think of the important international meeting which will be held at Durban, in South Africa, 31 August to 7 September. It is the UN World Conference Against Racial Discrimination. There, once again, the Church will raise a strong voice to safeguard the fundamental rights of man, rooted in his dignity of being created in the image and likeness of God.
The Pontifical Council for Justice and Peace has prepared, with an updated introduction, a new edition of the document published at my request in 1988, entitled The Church in Face of Racism:  For a More Fraternal Society, in order to present to the faithful and to the international community the thought of the Holy See on such a problem.

2. In the last decades, characterized by the phenomenon of globalization and marked by the worrying resurgence of aggressive nationalism, ethnic violence and widespread phenomena of racial discrimination, human dignity has often been seriously threatened. Every upright conscience cannot but decisively condemn any racism, no matter in what heart or place it is found.
Unfortunately it emerges in ever new and unexpected ways, offending and degrading the human family. Racism is a sin that constitutes a serious offence against God. The Second Vatican Council reminds us that "We cannot truly pray to God the Father of all if we treat any people in other than brotherly fashion, for all men are created in the image of God.... Therefore, the Church reproves, as foreign to the will of Christ, any discrimination against people or any persecution of them on the basis of their race, colour, social condition or religion" (Nostra aetate, n. 5).

3. To oppose racism we must practice the culture of reciprocal acceptance, recognizing in every man and woman a brother or sister with whom we walk in solidarity and peace. There is need for a vast work of education to the values that exalt the dignity of the human person and safeguard his fundamental rights. The Church intends to continue her efforts in this area, and asks all believers to make their own responsible contribution of conversion of heart, sensitization and formation. First of all, prayer is necessary to achieve this.
Particularly, let us invoke Our Lady, so that everywhere the culture of dialogue, of acceptance, and of respect for every human being may be advanced. To her we entrust the coming Conference of Durban which we hope will reinforce the common will to build a freer and more solidary society.
After the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims in French, English, German, Spanish and Portuguese. To the English visitors he said: 
I gladly welcome the new students of the Pontifical North American College who are beginning their studies for the priesthood in the Eternal City. May your years in Rome help you to deepen your faith and your love of the Church. Greetings also to the pilgrimage group from Villanova University. Upon all the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors present today at this Angelus prayer, I cordially invoke God's blessings of joy and peace.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday 19 August 2001
  1. Last year, in these very hours, the 15th World Youth Day was drawing to a close with the great gathering at Tor Vergata. I recalled the impressive images of the Vigil on Saturday evening and of the solemn Eucharistic celebration on Sunday, which concluded the meeting. That extraordinary event, in the middle of the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000, is remembered by all, especially by the young people who are protagonists of a promising springtime of hope for the Church and the world. During the Vigil, I entrusted to them with great affection that "At the dawn of the third millennium I see in you the "sentinels'", and the following day, in the homily of the closing Mass, I told them that if they were what they should be, they "would set the whole world ablaze!".
2. I continue to relive in spirit that intense spiritual event, and I am already thinking of the next world meeting, which will be held in July 2002. It will be another milestone on that winding pilgrimage which began in the World Year of Youth in 1985 and which, from time to time, calls a growing number of participants to gather round the Cross in various places on the five continents. This time we will meet in Toronto, a modern metropolis of Canada in North America, where inhabitants of different origins, cultures and religions live side by side. In this composite and complex reality, the need for Christians to be the "salt of the earth" and the "light of the world" is immediately perceived.
Jesus' words: "You are the salt of the earth.... You are the light of the world" (Mt 5,13-14) will therefore be the inspiring theme and motif of the next World Youth Day.
Aware of the commitment that comes to them from Baptism, young believers should not resign themselves to foolish forms of entertainment and fashions and programmes that are beneath the Christian; on the contrary, they should foster a lofty desire for the Lord and strive to avoid the mediocrity and conformism that are unfortunately widespread in today's society.
3. Dear young people, you understand well that one is not the "salt of the earth" or "light of the world" if one does not aspire to holiness. How I hope that you will never fail to keep this high spiritual ideal in your life! Mankind in the third millennium needs young people who are strong in faith and generous in serving their brethren. It needs young people who are in love with Christ and his Gospel.
The Church points out to you so many of your peers who, in the most varied situations, in our day too know how to fulfil the vocation proper to every baptized person. She shows you the way of prayer and confident recourse to divine help and to Mary's motherly intercession. I entrust the preparation, the expectations and the events of the next World Youth Day to the Blessed Virgin, whom I have called upon repeatedly in these past days, recalling the meeting of young people in Czestochowa 10 years ago, for the feast of the Assumption, with the same words I used then: "Maria, Regina mundi! Maria, Mater Ecclesiae! Tibi adsumus!" (Mary, Queen of the world! Mary, Mother of the Church! We are with you!).
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
In these days, in addition to the situation that is taking hold of the Holy Land, serious political tension is mounting in Lebanon after a wave of arrests that block national dialogue.
I appeal to the sense of responsibility of the leaders of that beloved nation whose internal divisions have caused it so much suffering: may the values of democracy and national sovreignty not be sacrificed to the political interests of the moment! A pluralist and free Lebanon is a treasure for the whole region of the Middle East: may everyone help the Lebanese to safeguard it and make it fruitful!
Lastly, the Holy Father greeted the faithful in various languages. To the English-speaking pilgrims he said:
To the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors I extend a warm welcome, and invite you to renew your trust in Mary's intercession and maternal care. In a special way I ask you to pray for peace in those areas of the world where it is seriously threatened. God bless you all!
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Solemnity of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary
Wednesday 15 August 2001
  1. "The queen stands at your right hand, arrayed in gold"! Thus the Church sings today, as she admires with great joy the miraculous event of the Assumption into Heaven of the Virgin Mary, in body and soul. This solemnity, set in the middle of summer, is a favourable occasion for meditating on the realities that go beyond earthly life. Contemplating Our Lady in heavenly glory, we understand better that our everyday commitments and efforts must not completely absorb us, because the horizons of life are not limited to the earth. In Her who shines with light today, we see the complete fulfilment of what the Heavenly Father promised to those who faithfully serve him, spurring their faithfulness, if necessary, even to the supreme gift of their lives.
2. St Maximilian Kolbe, whose feast we celebrated yesterday, was a courageous witness of this fidelity. He was always inspired by Mary, whom he liked to call his "sweet mother". A worthy spiritual son of St Francis, he died on 14 August 1941, precisely on the eve of the Solemnity of the Assumption, in the sadly notorious starvation bunker at Auschwitz.
This year is the 60th anniversary of his dramatic and heroic martyrdom. After indescribable sufferings, he was finished off with "an injection of poisonous acid in his left arm" - as recounted in the report by one of those who had observed the death - and, the next day, his corpse was burned in the crematorium ovens. He offered himself eagerly in exchange for a father of a family who was shouting: "My wife, my children! I won't see them any more!" His extraordinarily generous gesture can be symbolically considered a "gift to the family", whose fundamental mission in the Church and in society he understood well. For this reason he wrote, "the mutual love of persons who are united to form a family is an authentic echo of divine love" (SK 1326).
3. May the memory of this martyr of charity help believers to follow Christ and his Gospel without hesitation or compromise. St Maximilian, a devoted son of the Virgin Mary, encouraged families and youth in particular to find in the Mother of God a support in difficult times and a sure guide to holiness.
He always let himself be led by the hand of Mary Immaculate, convinced as he liked to repeat, that "Mary will think of everything for us and, removing every anguish and difficulty, will quickly come to the aid of our corporal and spiritual needs" (SK 2556).
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the faithful in various languages. To the English-speaking pilgrims he said:
On the great feast of Mary's Assumption into heaven, I invite the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors to live the Christian life with renewed trust in divine Providence which leads all creation to its true destiny. I commend you all to Our Lady's intercession.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday 12 August 2001
 
1. "You must be ready"! (cf. Lk 12,40). Christ's command, vigorously proposed again in today's Gospel passage, acquires a rare eloquence thinking of St Teresa Benedicta of the Cross (in the world, Edith Stein), Copatroness of Europe, whom the liturgy invited us to commemorate a few days ago. She died in the gas chamber at Auschwitz-Birkenau on 9 August 1942, with her sister Rosa and many of her people.
May the memory of her last act of love help humanity today to understand ever better the importance and value of life and the dignity of the human person.
2. We see life and human dignity violently trampled upon precisely in the Holy Land, with which St Teresa Benedicta of the Cross had strong spiritual ties.
In these days too, I have raised my voice many times, imploring inner peace for people in that martyred region, in the hope of seeing hands, disarmed at last, linked to form a chain. On the contrary, we continue to be submerged by images of desolation, lives cut short, bodies mutilated, families torn apart. This outbreak of unheard of brutality shows even more clearly how deceptive it is to claim that problems of justice and of the coexistence of peoples can be solved by recourse to violence.
3. Let us pray through the intercession of St Teresa Benedicta of the Cross that good will may not be lacking in the political and military leaders of the warring parties. May they be able, before God and history, to ponder the urgent need to silence weapons. May they reflect on the future of the peoples entrusted to them; a future that cannot consist of hatred but brotherhood; not of confrontation but collaboration.
May Mary, Mother of Humanity and Queen of Peace, obtain for the Holy Land and for the whole world, brotherhood, mutual respect and peace.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the faithful in various languages; to the English-speaking pilgrims he said:
To the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors I extend cordial greetings and I thank you for your prayers and good wishes. I ask Almighty God to bless you and your families.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II 
ANGELUS
Sunday, 5 August 2001
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Tomorrow, 6 August, we celebrate the Solemnity of the Transfiguration of the Lord. The Evangelists, Luke, Mark and Matthew, all recount that Jesus led the Apostles Peter, James and John "up a high mountain", identified as Tabor in Galilee. He was transfigured before them. "His face shone like the sun, and his garments became white as light" (Mt 17,1-2). Next to him appeared the venerable figures of Moses and Elijah. The Father himself, in "a bright cloud", made his voice heard at that moment, saying: "This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased; listen to him" (Mt 17,5).
After his Resurrection, this mystery, which the Lord commanded them to keep secret (cf. Mt 17,9), became an integral part of the Good News: Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, whom we contemplate today, radiant with the light of his glory.
2. Two thousand years later, the Church repeats with the same vigour that Christ is the light of the world! Every day his light impresses a new meaning upon our way of life.
The whole life of the Servant of God Paul VI, who died on 6 August 1978, was tempered by this proclamation. For the Angelus on that day, which he was unable to deliver, he had written: "The Transfiguration of the Lord throws a dazzling light on our daily life, and makes us turn our mind to the immortal destiny which that fact foreshadows".
Deeply moved, we hear his words again, after 23 years. Let us remember with gratitude and affection my venerable Predecessor who witnessed faithfully to Christ in complex, difficult years. Let us pray for him, calling upon the Blessed Virgin, the heavenly Mother of God.
3. Mary, Mother of God! This is how Rome venerates her today, celebrating the dedication of the Patriarchal Basilica of St Mary Major, the oldest Church in the West named after the Blessed Virgin Mary. This feast, which is so dear to Romans, is an invitation to turn our gaze to her whom the Father chose as the Mother of his Only-begotten Son, hence the Mother of all humanity. Let us ask her to help us remain united to her Son Jesus, always: now, and at the hour of our death.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the many pilgrims and visitors in French English, German, Spanish, Portuguese and Italian. To the English-speaking faithful he said:
I greet especially the Focolarini from Australia and the members of the John Carroll Society from the United States of America. Upon all the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors, I invoke the abundant blessings of Almighty God.
Lastly, the Pope prayed for those on the roads, setting out on their holidays or returning home.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II 
ANGELUS
Sunday, 29 July 2001
  1. Yesterday, 28 July, the United Nations celebrated the 50th anniversary of the Geneva Convention, on the status of refugees. This is an important agreement, which remains the foundation on which the international protection of refugees rests, since it was ratified by some 140 countries, including the Holy See.
For the nations involved in the Second World War, the past 50 years have been essentially years of peace. However, conflicts have not been lacking in the world, causing the number of refugees and forced migrants to grow. Moreover, numerous and serious breaches in the faithful application of the Geneva Convention have been observed. However, a sign of hope comes from the determination with which the United Nations High Commission for Refugees is working to verify the efficacy of the convention and its correspondence with present-day reality.

2. I hope that such an important effort for a higher level of protection and solidarity will bring it about that the fundamental right to asylum for all those in need will be not lost, and that the international community will also spur the individual states and those responsible to promote the necessary policies, to fulfil the duty of accepting refugees much better and to shelter them in a decent way.

Let us raise our prayer to God today, so that every form of forced human mobility may be banned; in order that individuals, families and social groups will be able to safeguard their own roots and their own identity. May their movements be unhampered and may an atmosphere of peace be established in the world, facilitated by the knowledge and respect of different human, cultural and spiritual values, which are proper to every people.
Let us entrust this special intention to the Blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of all mankind.
The Holy Father greeted the pilgrims in French, English, German, Spanish, Portuguese and Polish. He said in English:
I extend a special greeting to the pilgrims from the Parish of St George in the Diocese of Gozo, and I pray that Almighty God will bless you and your families. Upon all the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors, I invoke the abundant graces of Almighty God.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 22 July 2001
  1. Having just returned from the mountains of the Val d'Aosta, I am happy to be here today at Castel Gandolfo for the Sunday Angelus appointment. I warmly greet you, citizens of Castel Gandolfo. Thank you for the warm welcome you always give me. I want to greet the Bishop of Albano with his Auxiliary Bishop, the Mayor, the Parish Priest, and those who have in any way wished to show me their affection and support. I am happy to be among you again and I plan to stay in Castello until the next apostolic journey that, God willing, will take me to Armenia and Kazakhstan toward the end of September. Together with summer vacationers and pilgrims, you contribute to making my stay here a pleasant one. Thank you for your warm and sincere affection.

2. Today's Gospel presents the episode of Jesus' visit to Bethany, to the home of Martha and Mary, the sisters of Lazarus. Martha is very concerned with her preparations, while Mary sits peacefully at the feet of the Master listening to him. To Martha who complains that her sister does not help her, Jesus responds that "Mary has chosen the better part, which shall not be taken away from her" (Lk 10,42).
How can we not perceive in this episode the reminder of the primacy of the spiritual life, of the need to be nourished with the Word of God which gives light and savour to our daily routine. It is an invitation which is particularly opportune for the summer period. Holidays and vacation time, in fact, can help to balance activism with contemplation, haste with natural rhythms, great noise with the healing peace of silence.
3. A further source of reflection comes from the liturgy. On 22 July we celebrate the memorial of St Mary Magdalene, disciple of the Lord and first witness of the Resurrection. The story of St Mary of Magdala shows how decisive it is for each one of us to meet Christ personally. It is Christ who understands the human heart. It is he who can satisfy its hopes and longings and give answers to the concerns and the difficulties that humanity today faces in its daily endeavours.

To him we wish to entrust the results of the meeting of the Heads of State and of Government which just ended in Genoa, but not without expressing our deep regret over the hostilities that were unleashed there, unfortunately, with tragic consequences. Violence is not the way to reach an equitable solution for existing problems. Once again I encourage all who really have at heart the rights of the human person to persevere in their dedication to a world that will be more just and more responsible for human beings.
We ask the intercession of Mary, Mother of Jesus and of the whole human race. We turn to her with the prayer of the Angelus.
After the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims in their native tongues: French, English, German, Spanish, Portuguese and Italian.
In Italian he greeted the persons following the course at the Pontifical Athenaeum Regina Apostolorum for those who are dedicated to formation work in seminaries. He said in English:
I extend a special greeting to the Girl Guides from Malta who are passing through Rome today. Upon all the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors I invoke abundant divine gifts of peace and joy. God bless you and your families.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday 15 July 2001
  Your Eminence, dear bishops, priests,
monks, women religious, brothers and sisters,
1. I join you today for the weekly recitation of the Angelus in this beautiful place in the Val d'Aosta, where I now feel as if I belong, thanks to the hospitality of the Diocese of Aosta, the Salesians and all who cooperate with courtesy and generosity to organize a peaceful stay for me. I express my deep gratitude to you.
In particular, I thank Bishop Giuseppe Anfossi of Aosta, the Presidents of the City and Regional Council, as well as the Mayor and the parish priest of Introd. I greet with affection the kind people of the Val d'Aosta, who each year welcome me with great cordiality, as well as the visitors on vacation and pilgrims who came to visit me today.

In a special way, I greet the mayors of the towns that were most seriously affected by last October's floods. They took a toll of 20 victims and caused immense damage throughout the region. Through you, gentlemen, I would like to encourage once again the families who suffered and are suffering the most from that disaster. I urge everyone to persevere with a spirit of confidence and solidarity in his commitment to rebuilding.

2. For several months now at the General Audiences, I have been giving a special catechesis on the Psalms. In these days, with this amazing scenery before our eyes, I naturally think of the Psalms in which creation, and especially the mountains, comes to the fore.
I am thinking, for example, of Psalm 8: "O Lord, Our God", the Psalmist exclaims in Psalm 8, "how great is your name through all the earth" (vv. 2.10). In Ps 19 (18) we read "the heavens tell the glory of God; and the firmament proclaims his handiwork" (v. 2). In fact, creation is the first chapter of revelation that God entrusted to human minds and hearts.
Psalm 23 (22) says so splendidly, "the Lord is my shepherd ... he makes me lie down in green pastures, he leads me beside still waters, he refreshes my soul. He leads me in the path of righteousness...".
The whole of Psalm 104 (103) is a hymn to the Creator: "bless the Lord, O my soul / O Lord my God, you are very great! / ...You make the springs gush forth in the valleys / they flow between the hills; / ...The high mountains are for the wild goats; the rocks are a refuge for the badgers.... O Lord how manifold are your works!" (vv. 1-2.5.8.10-11.18.24). We need to make these sentiments our own in the face of the natural beauty that is so awe-inspiring!

3. As I contemplate the peaks of these mountains, which are now familiar to me, I often think of Mary. God has raised her above all angelic and earthly creatures and has made her our mainstay on the journey towards heaven. Tomorrow in the liturgy we will celebrate her as Our Lady of Mount Carmel. Today we venerate her as the "Queen of Val d'Aosta", represented by the beautiful statue that was brought for this purpose from the Cathedral of Aosta. It is the same statue that travelled through the villages of the region in 1948, recreating in the people of Val d'Aosta a renewed spirit of brotherhood after the Second World War. Let us pray to Mary that there may always be unity among Christians and that justice, solidarity and peace will reign in the world.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted in French and Italian the authorities, religious, inhabitants of the municipality of Introd:
I cordially greet and thank the civil and religious authorities and all the inhabitants of the municipality of Introd, who have welcomed me to their region of Les Combes, where the beauty of the scenery and of the snowy peaks prompts the soul to turn to the Creator of the world. On this day dedicated to the Lord, I invite all the faithful who have taken part in the prayer of the Angelus to take the time to praise God and give him thanks for all his benefits. May the Blessed Virgin Mary, Queen of the Val d'Aosta, instil peace in peoples' hearts and invite them to be united and show solidarity in order to go to the aid of those affected by tragedies! With my Apostolic Blessing.
I extend a cordial greeting to the Benedictine nuns who have come from Switzerland.
I greet the children of the holiday camp of Giussano (Diocese of Milan), several representatives of the Pro-Life Movement of Pavia, a group of Focolarini and members of Communione e Liberazione and the football team from Turin. I greet those who joined this prayer and those who have joined us by radio and TV.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 8 July 2001
  1. Today my thoughts are with those taking part in the national meeting of Catholic associations which is taking place in Genoa, to prepare for the impending meeting of government leaders. In this way they wanted to fulfil the task I entrusted to young people at Tor Vergata: "You will not be resigned", I said, "to a world where other human beings die of hunger, remain illiterate and have no work. You will defend life at every moment of its development; you will strive with all your strength to make this earth ever more liveable for all people".

I join the Bishops of Liguria [the area around Genoa] who, in a recent letter addressed to the faithful, express the urgent need to reawaken a sense of the urgent need for a new "morality' in everyone, "beginning with those responsible for public administration". The need becomes more urgent when one considers the serious, and even tragic, problems in the economic/financial, health, social, cultural, environmental and political orders.
In fact, faith cannot leave Christians indifferent to such issues of world importance. It incites them to challenge those responsible for politics and economics with a purposeful spirit, asking that the present process of globalization be firmly governed by the motive of the common good of citizens across the world, based on the indispensable requirements of justice and solidarity.

2. For this reason, the richest and technologically most advanced peoples, aware that God the Creator and Father wants to make humanity one family, must hear the cry of so many poor people of the world - they are simply asking for what is their sacrosanct right.
I would like to assure the leaders of government throughout the world and, in particular, those who will be meeting in Genoa, that the Church, along with people of good will, will do her utmost to ensure that the real winner in the process is going to be mankind. In fact, the common destination of earthly goods is a cornerstone of the Church's social teaching.
First of all, I ask Christians to pray particularly for government leaders. I urge leaders to work together to build a world attuned to the demands of justice and solidarity. Christians need a strong moral and spiritual education, an in-depth knowledge of the Church's social doctrine and great love for Jesus Christ, redeemer of every human being and of the whole human person to be effective.
3. I am confident that on this occasion too, Italy will show her typical and exquisite hospitality to all who arrive in Genoa for the event, in an atmosphere of concord and serenity. Let us ask the Blessed Virgin Mary to pour into the heart of each one sentiments of peace and solidarity, so that the coming meeting may help prepare mature decisions that will foster the good of all humanity.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the faithful in French, Spanish and Italian:
My cordial greetings to you, French-speaking pilgrims who have come to Rome in this summer period. I extend a special greeting to the young singers of Acadie. May you make this days of rest a time of spiritual renewal! I impart my Apostolic Blessing to you all.
I warmly greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims, and especially the seminarians and young lay people of the Work of the Church. May God bless you, increase your hope and strengthen the vocation of each one, and may you witness in this way to supporting Christ and his Church.
I greet with affection the Italian-speaking pilgrims, and I extend a cordial thought to the Romans and Italians who have gone on holiday. I invite all who will be travelling to be very careful.
Tomorrow I am going away, to the Aosta Valley, to spend ten days in those beloved mountains. I will keep everyone in my prayers, and especially the sick and the lonely. I hope that each one may be able to enjoy a well-deserved rest during the summer, even those who cannot reasonably leave their cities and countries.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II 
ANGELUS
Sunday 1 July 2001
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The month of July begins today, which popular tradition has dedicated to the contemplation of Christ's Precious Blood, unfathomable mystery of love and mercy.
In today's liturgy, the Apostle Paul says in his letter to the Galatians that "For freedom Christ has set us free" (Gal 5,1). This freedom has a high price:  it is the life and blood of the Redeemer. Yes! Christ's Blood is the price God paid to free humanity from the slavery of sin and death.
The Blood of Christ is the undeniable proof of the heavenly Father's love for all men, without exception.
All this was well emphasized by Blessed John XXIII, who had a devotion to the Blood of the Lord from childhood, when he would hear the appropriate litany recited in his family. Once elected Pope, he wrote an Apostolic Letter to promote this devotion (Inde a primis, 30 June 1959), inviting the faithful to meditate on the infinite value of that Blood, "a single drop of which can save the whole world from every sin" (Hymn:  Adoro Te devote).
2. May meditation on the sacrifice of the Lord, a pledge of hope and peace for the world, be an encouragement and an incentive for building peace, even where it seems almost unattainable. Today my thoughts turn in a special way to Sri Lanka where, on the occasion of the feast of Our Lady of Madhu, the Catholic community is gathering in prayer at that famous shrine to implore the much longed for gift of peace. The parties involved in the tragic ethnic conflict, which has been sowing violence and appalling atrocities for almost 20 years in that beloved nation, are having difficulty in finding the path of dialogue and reconciliation. A negotiated solution is the only way to deal with the serious issues that are at the root of the present conflict.
May Mary, Mother of Him who redeemed the world with his blood, bless the persevering efforts of all those who in Sri Lanka and elsewhere who are promoting a climate of impartiality and detente, indispensable premises for the achievement of concord and peace.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
I extend a cordial welcome to the members of the editorial staff of L'Osservatore Romano, who are present today in this Square with their Editor-in-chief to commemorate the 140th anniversary of their newspaper. I thank  them for their daily work at the service of the truth, faithfully adhering to the Magisterium of the Successor of Peter. I hope that each one will persevere in the courageous defence of the fundamental human and Christian values, on which all civil coexistence is based, offering everyone the image of a Church which is always open to the world's expectations.
The Holy Father then offered greetings and best wishes in Polish, German and Italian to students as they finish their exams and begin their summer vacations.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II 
SOLEMNITY OF THE HOLY APOSTLES PETER AND PAUL
 ANGELUS
Friday, 29 June 2001
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Less than two days ago, I returned from Ukraine and today's Angelus gives me the opportunity to thank the Virgin Mary for the great gift of this Apostolic trip.
Visiting Ukraine, the historical bridge between the East and West, was for me a long-awaited goal, which I prepared for in prayer. Realizing it is further confirmation of a providential design: that the Church in Europe may begin to breathe again with its two lungs, so that the whole continent will experience a renewed evangelization.
The welcome from the Ukrainian faithful was truly warm and moving. I express my warm gratitude to all.
2. In the ecumenical spirit that marked the pilgrimage to Greece and the one just concluded, I am happy to welcome today to Rome the Delegation of the Patriarchate of Constantinople, which will attend the solemn Mass that will take place this evening at 6: 30 p.m. in the square in front of St Peter's Basilica. Welcome! The house of Peter welcomes you with esteem and affection.
With the same affection I greet the 36 Metropolitan Archbishops appointed in the course of the year, who will receive the Pallium during today's Mass.
My greetings are also extended to the numerous Bishops appointed in the course of the year, who have come to Rome to participate in the study days promoted by the Congregation for Bishops. I sincerely hope that this pause close to the relics of the Apostles, will give them light and encouragement for a better exercise of their pastoral service.
3. We now turn to the Blessed Virgin Mary with the Angelus prayer. I pray with particular affection to the Virgin Mary for all Romans, on the feast of their holy Patrons. May their faith be strong, like Peter's, and rich in apostilic zeal, like Paul's. Only in this way, dear Christians of Rome, will you be the salt and light of this City, which will thus be able to continue to measure up to the height of its spiritual mission in the world, and, above all, in this significant phase of its history.
    © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 24 June 2001
Kyiv (Chayka Airport)
  Before concluding this solemn Eucharistic celebration, let us turn in the prayer of the Angelus to Mary Most Holy, to whom the Ukrainian people are deeply devoted.
Mary, the first and the most perfect disciple of her Son, is a figure and a model of the Church which welcomes the word of the Lord in faith. Her protection has accompanied every step of the Christian community in Ukraine ever since the Baptism of Rus’ in 988.
Bathed by the great river of faith, Ukraine thus became a Christian land and, at the same time, a Marian country. This can be seen in the numerous shrines which express the deep love of the faithful for their heavenly Mother. For the faithful of the Latin Rite I am thinking, in particular, of the Shrines of Berdichiv and of Letichiv. Among the faithful of the Byzantine Rite the Shrines of Zarvanytsia and of Hoshiv are greatly venerated. In mind and heart I wish to visit these places of worship and prostrate myself devoutly at the feet of the Virgin to invoke upon everyone her maternal protection.
To Mary’s heavenly intercession I entrust this my pastoral visit and all those whom I shall meet during these days. In a special way I ask her, Mother of the Church, to hasten the steps of all Christians towards full communion. In Ukraine and throughout the world, may believers in Christ be able as soon as possible to fulfil the heartfelt prayer of the one Lord: "Ut omnes unum sint!" (Jn 17:2). May this take place per Mariam, through Mary, Mother of all believers, Mother of unity!
The Holy Father's various language greetings:
At the end of this Solemn Mass, I wish to greet the inhabitants of Kyiv and the pilgrims who speak Polish. I am happy that you have come to thank God, together with the Pope and the Church of Kyiv, for the more than 1,000 years of Christianity in Ukraine. I greet you cordially with the greeting:  Praised be Jesus Christ.
I commend to the divine protection the inhabitants of this City and of the entire Ukraine. May they hand on to the generations of the new millennium in an integral and enriched way the treasure of the faith that they have preserved for centuries - often at the cost of renunciation and sacrifice even to the point of shedding their blood.
To the Blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of the Church, I entrust the pastors, families, young persons, and children, persons who are lonely and those in need. May her love embrace each one and allow them to drink with abundance at the fountain of God's grace. May God bless you.
Now I greet with affection the faithful of the Russian language. Beloved, I exhort you to draw continually from prayer the strength and courage to adhere faithfully to the Gospel becoming faithful disciples of Christ. He is the Way, the Truth, and the Life for everyone and for all nations. From my heart I bless you. Praised be Jesus Christ.
I greet with affection the pilgrims of the Belarusian language, who have joined our celebration. Beloved, through you, I want to make my greeting and my blessing reach your entire nation. May the example of the Precursor of the Lord inspire you to announce Christ courageously to your compatriots. Praised be Jesus Christ.
I cordially greet the Lithuanian faithful. Beloved, often I have the chance to greet many of your compatriots who come to visit me in Rome. Today I have arrived in this nation which is close to your great country. I send to all of you a cordial greeting. I bless you cordially, your families and your great Nation. Praised be Jesus Christ.
I cordially greet the Romanian faithful. Beloved, I still vividly remember my visit to Romania, and especially, the warm welcome you gave me. I thank you for coming here today and I bless you and your families and your Nations most cordially. Praised be Jesus Christ.
With affection in the Lord Jesus, I greet the pilgrims who have come from other countries. At the beginning of the millennium the Church needs your faith, your prayer, your fidelity. The world needs the witness of your love and service. God bless you all (English).
With great joy I greet you, dear sisters and brothers of the German language. May the celebration of the Eucharist strengthen your faith, so that your works may be a sign of the love in which unity is grounded. I am happy to give you and your dear ones the Apostolic Blessing.
I cordially greet all the faithful who have shared in the Eucharistic celebration. Strengthened by the Word of God and by communion with the Risen Christ, may they be witnesses of the Gospel and builders of unity among Christians and of brotherhood with everyone (French).
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday 17 June 2001
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. I still have a vivid memory of the devout celebration of the Eucharist at which I presided last Thursday at St John Lateran for the Solemnity of Corpus Christi, and of the subsequent solemn procession to St Mary Major. For pastoral reasons, this beautiful and traditional feast is celebrated today, Sunday, in Italy and in many other countries. The ecclesial Community gathers in adoration around the most precious treasure that Christ the Lord left it in heritage: the sacrament of the Eucharist, the perpetual memorial of his redemptive sacrifice.
Corpus Christi has become a popular celebration, thanks to the lovely custom of carrying the Blessed Sacrament through the streets of our cities and towns. It is a feast in which we rejoice over the extraordinary gift of the Bread of life which, as Christ promised, guarantees eternal life the Bread that is really his flesh, his humanity, through which God sanctifies hearts, people, communities, nations and the whole cosmos.
The Eucharist thus becomes the principle of the new humanity and the renewed world, whose complete manifestation will take place at the end of history. Already now it is growing as the seed and leaven of the kingdom of God.
2. The distinctive feature of the new humanity redeemed by Christ is the fullness of fraternal love.
Actually the Eucharist is the Sacrament of love par excellence, understood as the gift of self.
Without the spiritual nourishment that the Body and Blood of Christ gives us, human love is always tainted by selfishness. On the other hand, Communion with the Bread of heaven converts hearts and instils in them the capacity to love as Jesus loved us.
"Communion": the name that we often give to the Eucharist, is especially significant in this regard. Those who receive the Body of Christ with faith are closely united to him and, through him, to God the Father, in the love of the Holy Spirit. God in man, man in God. And this becomes the true foundation of communion in the Church. As the Apostle Paul writes to the Corinthians: "Because there is one bread, we ... are one body" (I Cor 10,17).
3. Jesus, Bread of eternal life, descended from heaven, thanks to the faith of the Blessed Virgin.
After bearing him within her with ineffable love, she faithfully followed the incarnate Word to the Cross and the Resurrection. Let us ask Mary to help us rediscover the centrality of the Eucharist, especially on the Lord's Day, in order to live fraternal communion to the full. We also ask her to lead us towards true unity. I would like to entrust to Mary in a very special way the upcoming pilgrimage I shall be making in Ukraine, starting next Saturday. May this apostolic journey be another milestone on the desired way towards the unity of all Christians.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father mentioned the World Refugee Day to be celebrated on Wednesday, 20 June, and greeted the faithful:
World Refugee Day will be celebrated next Wednesday. It emphasizes the solidarity we owe to millions of people who are living the difficult plight of refugees. This scourge has unfortunately increased in recent years: consequently the need for international protection has increased, but so have the number of countries that tend to restrict it. As I hope that the causes of forced migration everywhere will be removed, I invite people to renew their efforts to see that refugees never lack the just understanding and help they need.
I extend a special greeting to the pilgrims from Malaysia and Singapore, and I pray that Almighty God will continue to bless you and your families with vigorous faith and generosity in acts of charity. Upon all the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors, I invoke the abundant blessings of Almighty God.
I affectionately greet the Italian pilgrims and especially the parish groups of Rome and of Civita Castellana, with the hope that their visit to the tomb of St Peter will nourish their faith and Gospel witness.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 10 June 2001
  1. Before concluding this solemn celebration, let us turn our gaze to the Virgin Mary, Queen of all saints. Her humble and sublime existence is a masterpiece of the Holy Trinity and for every baptized person represents the "archetype" of Christian life, to which we should aspire with trust and determination.
2. I greet His Beatitude Cardinal Sfeir, the Maronite Patriarch, and the Bishops, priests, men and women religious, as well as the representatives of the Lebanese authorities and all the Lebanese faithful who came for the canonization of Sr Rafqa. I extend my cordial greetings to the members of the Lebanese Maronite Order, who are seeing one of their own raised to the glory of the altars. This is a special appeal to them to walk with renewed fervour on the path of holiness, through a life that conforms more and more closely to the Gospel. May everyone remember that daily witness, based on living in intimacy with Christ, is a unique instrument of evangelization.
I warmly welcome the English-speaking pilgrims and I encourage them to follow the example of the new saints with confidence and generosity. I thank you for your prayerful presence.
I greet with affection all the Spanish-speaking faithful who have taken part in this celebration in honour of the new saints. May their example and intercession be for everyone an effective incentive on the way to holiness.
I greet Cardinals Dionigi Tettamanzi, Salvatore De Giorgi and Giovanni Canestri together with the Bishops, priests, men and women religious and the numerous Italian faithful who have come to honour the memory of the new saints. My gratitude goes to the authorities who have wished to join in this celebration. The call to holiness is universal because our Father who is in heaven is holy. May today's celebration of holiness increase in each one the strength to undertake this demanding but exalting journey.
3. I extend a special thought to the young workers who during these days have organized in Bari a great celebration on the theme "young people and work". Young people, I hope you will be leaders in the work-place and face every problem confidently. Never resign yourselves to economic models that exclude or exploit the weakest, but do your utmost to make work decent for the individual, for families and for society.
May Mary, whom we invoke with the prayer of the Angelus, keep us all under her motherly protection.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II 
REGINA COELI
Solemnity of Pentecost 
Sunday 3 June 2001
  1. At the end of this solemn celebration, I want to entrust to Mary's motherly intercession the whole Church which, at Pentecost, acquires a renewed awareness of her missionary vocation. Let us also place the world's expectations of peace and justice in her hands. In particular, let us commend to Our Lady's intercession the lives of all the young people who are victims of the absurd violence that is unfortunately being perpetrated in various countries, as the most recent news received from the Holy Land testifies. Among them, the children involved in armed conflicts deserve special remembrance. In about 50 countries, many minors are living in the midst of conflicts or post-conflict situations. They are victims of forced recruitment and of abuses of all kinds. They cannot go to school, they are separated from their parents and are subjected to physical and psychological violence.
I appeal to the international community to increase its efforts to protect and rehabilitate all who live in these tragic conditions. May children, who are the future and hope of humanity, at last be able to grow up far from the scourge of war and from every form of violence. May Mary, Mother of life, protect little children in danger and uphold those who strive to help them.
2. In a little while, the venerable remains of Bl. John XXIII, which we had beside us during Holy Mass, will be devoutly translated to the Vatican Basilica, where they will remain exposed for the veneration of the faithful. I am thinking again with admiration of my unforgettable predecessor's brief but intense Pontificate. Remembering him at this moment I would like above all to recall his fervent devotion to Our Lady. He often spoke of the good traditions of his childhood, when the oldest family member would lead the recitation of the Rosary at home. Since that time - he was fond of saying - the Blessed Virgin had taken him by the hand and accompanied him on the path of the priesthood, the ideal of his whole life.
During his last General Audience in St Peter's Basilica on 15 May 1963, he urged everyone to increase the signs of loving devotion to Mary, to whom, he stressed, the Eternal City is, as it were, totally consecrated.
Let us make his spiritual testament our own! Like him, let us deepen our ties with the Mother of Christ and Tabernacle of the Holy Spirit and, prompted by new fervour, let us call upon her with trust: Regina caeli ...
© Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II 
REGINA COELI
Sunday, 27 May 2001
Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today in Italy and in other countries the Ascension of Jesus into heaven is celebrated. The traditional day would have been last Thursday, but for pastoral reasons the feast has been transferred to the following Sunday.
The event of the Ascension of Jesus made an indelible impression on the memory of the first disciples so that we find their witness to it in the Gospels and in the Acts of the Apostles. Forty days after his resurrection, Jesus led his disciples to the Mount of Olives, "towards Bethany", and "while he blessed them, he parted from them and was carried up to heaven" (Lk 24,50-51). Naturally, they remained looking on high, but were suddenly called back to earth by two angels, "Why do you stand looking into heaven? This Jesus ... will come in the same way that you have seen him go into heaven".
2. "On earth as it is in heaven": the words which we repeat daily in praying the Our Father express well the condition of the disciples, transformed by the experience of the Easter mystery of Christ. They are to be citizens of both earth and heaven.
In fact, Christ in his humanity became the bridge between earth and heaven: He is the mediator between God and man, between the kingdom of heaven and the history of the world. United to him in his Spirit, believers form a new community, the Church, whose nature is both visible and spiritual, pilgrim in the world and sharer in heavenly glory (cf Lumen Gentium, n. 8, 48-51).
3. Among all creatures, Mary, more than any other creature, has been associated with this mystery. As the new Eve from whom is born the new Adam, she shows us the way to live our earthly mission. At the same time, since she was assumed body and soul into heaven, she invites us to tend toward our true home, where the fullness of the love of the Triune God awaits us.
While the Church sets out into the deep of the new millennium, she does not lose sight of her polar star which orients her navigation. That star is Christ, the Lord of history. Beside him we find his and our Mother, who does not cease to accompany her children on their earthly pilgrimage. We look to her with sincere hope. To her we entrust the hopes and projects of the Church as they emerged in the Extraordinary Consistory just concluded. We ask of her for the whole world the gift of peace while with redoubled confidence we sing the Regina Caeli.
© Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA COELI
Sunday 20 May 2001

Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today, on the Sixth Sunday of the Easter Season, the Liturgy puts before us the passage from the Acts of the Apostles in which the event of the so-called "Council of Jerusalem" is narrated (Acts 15: 11-29). The Apostles and the presbyters convoked the first assembly in order to resolve what was then a crucial problem. In the face of some believers of the group of the Pharisees, convinced that the pagan converts to Christianity should be circumcised and observe the Mosaic law, Paul and Barnabas maintained very forcefully that salvation does not come from the works of the law but from faith in Christ.
Thanks to the inspired interventions of Peter and James, the direction of Paul and Barnabas prevailed and from that day the Church "put out into the deep", ready to bring the Gospel to all peoples and to all cultures. The apostolic impulse impressed by the Spirit at the beginning has not weakened and even now continues while we begin to live in the third millennium. The one desire and duty of believers remains that of announcing to all humanity Jesus our Redeemer.
2. On this path we can place the Extraordinary Consistory of the College of Cardinals which begins tomorrow. I will conclude it with the Solemn Eucharistic Celebration, which I will preside over on Thursday morning in St Peter's Basilica. In the coming days we will consider together the opportunities for the life of the Church and of her mission in the world. Our fundamental point of reference will be the Apostlic Letter Novo millennio ineunte, in which, in the light of the Jubilee experience, I indicated the priorities for the entire People of God:  contemplate the face of Christ our Lord, start again from him on a renewed path of holiness; be witnesses of his love.
3. At every moment, but especially at the most decisive moments, the Church has to listen to the Spirit. It was so in the Cenacle of Jerusalem, it so happened during the first "council" which opened the doors to the pagans, and it will be so during our Consistory. Along with the Successor of Peter and his closest collaborators in the governance of the universal Church, the Cardinals, there cannot be lacking the prayerful support of the People of God. For this reason I invite you, brothers and sisters, to accompany us with your prayer, first of all, by invoking the maternal assistance of the Virgin Mary, Mother of the Church. To her we direct our prayer with great confidence as we sing together the Regina Caeli.
© Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II;
REGINA COELI
Sunday, 13 May 2001
Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today, with you, I would like to thank God and the Blessed Virgin for the Pilgrimage in the footsteps of St Paul which I recently had the joy of making. Athens, Damascus, Malta:  impressed on my heart are the places which the mission of the Apostle of the Gentiles indissolubly linked to the history of Christianity. Next Wednesday at the General Audience, I will reflect at length on such an unforgettable trip, which was important from the ecumenical and interreligious standpoint.
Unfortunately it was marred by the sad news that continues to arrive from the Holy Land. In fact, we are facing a spiral of absurd violence! Sowing death every day only exasperates hearts and delays the blessed day when we will all be able to look one another in the face and walk together as brothers and sisters! It is the duty of all, and especially the leaders of the international community, to help the parties in conflict to break this immoral chain of provocation and reprisal. It should also be recalled, as I have so many times repeated, that the language and culture of peace must prevail over the incitement to hatred and exclusion.
2. The priestly ordinations which I celebrated this morning in St Peter's Basilica, are a cause of joy and praise. Thirty-four deacons of the Diocese of Rome, who come from various seminaries, became priests, to serve the Church by preaching the Gospel, by celebrating the sacraments and by guiding God's People as their pastors.
To each one of them I renew my embrace of peace, assuring them that I will accompany their new ministry in prayer. I thank all those who have seen to their formation and greet their relatives and friends with affection.
3. I ask the Blessed Virgin Mary to show her motherly protection to these new priests of the Diocese of Rome, on the day on which we commemorate her apparitions in Fátima. I myself experienced her protection on 13 May twenty years ago.
To her I renew my prayers for the Holy Land, that the hearts and intentions of all may be purified so that there will be no more massacres, and that the energies of both sides be engaged in building a real and lasting peace.
© Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA COELI
Damascus - Sunday, 6 May 2001
  Dear Brothers and Sisters from Damascus and all of Syria,
Before ending this Eucharistic Liturgy with a prayer to the Queen of Heaven, Mother of the Risen Christ, I wish to offer heartfelt thanks to all who have gathered here, around this altar, to offer the Lord our thanksgiving and to present to him our urgent petitions.
I know that all Christians in Syria have a great filial love and a profound veneration for the Virgin Mary, Mother of Jesus, who is likewise respected by our Muslim brothers and sisters.
I deeply regret that my visit to you during these few short days does not permit me to make a pilgrimage of prayer in all the Churches dedicated to the Mother of God in this great and noble city of Damascus. I must limit myself to the two Patriarchal Cathedrals dedicated to the Dormition.
I would also have liked my pilgrimage in the footsteps of Saint Paul to have included a visit to some of the venerable Shrines of the Virgin Mother of God, such as those at nearby Seidnaya, or in Homs, Aleppo, Tartus and elsewhere. I have not forgotten that according to a pious tradition it was near Tartus that the Apostle Peter, on a journey from Jerusalem to Antioch along the Mediterranean coast, dedicated a chapel to the Virgin Mary, the first Marian shrine in Syria.
As you know, in a few days time, when I leave this city and your country, I shall continue in the footsteps of Saint Paul to Malta, where a celebrated icon of Our Lady of Damascus is piously preserved and venerated in the Greek Catholic Church in Valletta, the capital of the Island. Kneeling before that image, I will remember all of you. I promise to take to Our Lady your prayers and hopes, and I promise to ask her, as I do now, to intercede with her Divine Son for all of you and your families.
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA COELI
Sunday, 29 April 2001
  1. Before concluding this solemn celebration which has enabled us to taste the joy of the communion of saints, let us turn with filial devotion to the Virgin Mary who is the centre of this communion, as she was the centre of the communion in the Upper Room in Jerusalem.
In her, the new blesseds found their guide on the pilgrimage of faith, their comforting sign of sure hope, their example of generous love for God and for their brethren. Those who walk in Christ's footsteps on the path of holiness experience Our Lady's motherly closeness on their way.
With the approach of the month of May, I invite everyone to prepare to spend it in union with Mary, reciting the Rosary individually or as a community. At the school of the Blessed Virgin, so many men and women down the centuries have been formed in holiness. They urge us to join their shining ranks to sing together of the Queen of Heaven's glory.
2. Dear Sisters of St Anne and all of you Canadian pilgrims who have come to take part in the beatification of Marie Anne Blondin, I extend my cordial greetings to you. May the new blessed light your spiritual journey in the following of Christ, making you humbly available to the inspirations of the Holy Spirit, just as she was!
As I greet with affection the Misioneras Eucarísticas de Nazaret and all the other Spanish-speaking pilgrims who have taken part in this solemn ceremony, I would like to recall how important it was for the new blesseds on their way to God to have constant recourse to the intercession of the Virgin Mary. May their example help you to trust in her always, in all circumstances.
3. Today in Italy we celebrated the Day of the Catholic University. In addressing good wishes and greetings to this athenaeum's teachers and students, I thank all who in various capacities contribute to supporting its scientific and cultural activity.
Lastly, I greet the Italian-speaking pilgrims and thank them for their devout presence. Let us now sing the Regina Caeli together.
© Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA COELI
Sunday, 22 April 2001
  1. As we approach the conclusion of the solemn Eucharistic celebration, let us turn our gaze to Mary Most Holy, whom we call upon today with the sweetest name of "Mater misericordiae". Mary is "Mother of mercy", because she is the Mother of Jesus in whom God revealed to the world his "heart" overflowing with love.
God's compassion for man is communicated to the world precisely through the Virgin Mary's motherhood. Mary's motherhood, which began in Nazareth through the work of the Holy Spirit, was fulfilled in the Easter mystery, when she was closely associated with the Passion, Death and Resurrection of the divine Son. At the foot of the Cross Our Lady became mother of the disciples of Christ, mother of the Church and of all humanity. "Mater misericordiae".
2. I greet the pilgrims who have come here from Poland, and all who have a special devotion to God's mercy and have taken part in this Holy Mass by radio and television. In a special way I have joined in spirit the Cardinal of Kraków and the vast number of Bishops, religious and faithful who have gathered today at the Shrine of Divine Mercy in £agiewniki. During this celebration together with you I thanked God who almost a year ago granted me the grace to canonize Sr Faustina Kowalska, the chosen apostle of the merciful Christ, and to proclaim the Second Sunday of Easter as the feast of Divine Mercy for the entire Church.
Filled with joy we present ourselves before the Risen One today and say with faith:  "Jesus, I trust in you!". May this confession full of love strengthen everyone on the path of daily life and encourage them to undertake works of mercy for their brothers and sisters. May this be a message of hope for the entire new millennium.
3. Now, with the recitation of the antiphon "Regina Caeli", we ask Mary to enable us to experience the deep joy of the Resurrection and to collaborate with dedication in the universal plan of divine mercy.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
         
JOHN PAUL II 
REGINA COELI
Monday, 16 April 2001
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
With great joy I offer you my cordial and affectionate greeting, along with my fervent wishes for a Happy Easter.
I am pleased to be able to spend some days with you. I would have liked, as was usual, to come and stay here in Castel Gandolfo after last Christmas as well. I was prevented, as you know, by the many commitments of the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000 which brought so many pilgrims to Rome.
I greet your Bishop, dear Agostino Vallini, Auxiliary Bishop Paolo Gillet, the parish priest and the other priests and religious present. I greet the mayor and all the residents, who always welcome me with great cordiality. I extend my greetings to all who are following us on radio and television and to those who are making the traditional Easter Monday outing today. Nor have I forgotten those who cannot fully experience the joy of these Easter celebrations because of difficulties or moments of suffering and loneliness. I assure you all of a remembrance in my prayer.
On this holiday, known in Italy as "Monday of the Angel", there is still a strong echo in the liturgy of the heavenly messenger's words to the women who had gone to the tomb: "Go quickly and tell his disciples that he has risen from the dead" (Mt 28: 7). We hear the invitation as though addressed to us, too, to "go quickly" and proclaim the Gospel to the people of our time.
May Mary, whom we call upon today in the Regina Caeli prayer, help us in this demanding mission which belongs to all the baptized. May she support us especially in bearing faithful witness that Jesus is truly risen and that humanity's hope is restored to life in him.
    © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
16th WORLD YOUTH DAY
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
St Peter's Square
Palm Sunday, 8 April 2001
  As is now our happy tradition, in a few moments Italian young people will hand over the Youth Day Cross to their Canadian peers, who will host the 17th World Youth Day in their country during the summer of next year. Its theme will be: "You are the salt of the earth ... you are the light of the world" (Mt 5: 13-14). Once again the Cross continues its pilgrimage on the highways of the world with the young generations, who enter the new millennium carrying and following the sign of Christ who died and rose again, the victor over evil and death.
I greet the young Canadians present, led by the Archbishop of Toronto, Cardinal Ambrozic, and to them I entrust the Cross. I encourage you to prepare well for the next important appointment of World Youth Day, which has as its theme "You are the salt of the earth ... you are the light of the world" (Mt 5: 13-14). Dear young people, get ready to welcome the young people of the world to your beautiful country by renewing your own fidelity to Christ the Lord. Fidelity to Christ, this is my invitation to all the English-speaking pilgrims. Until we meet in Toronto!
I affectionately greet the French pilgrims who have taken part in the Palm Sunday liturgy, and most especially the young people of Canada. Dear young friends, may the 17th World Youth Day be an auspicious occasion for deepening your faith and your life with Christ, as well as for bearing a renewed witness to your love and to the joyful, worldwide openness of your heart! My prayer accompanies you, with my affectionate Apostolic Blessing.
I cordially greet the German-speaking pilgrims, especially the young Christians. Dear young friends, this morning you sang "Hosanna" to the Lord. Make Jesus Christ your traveling companion, and let yourselves be led by him to World Youth Day, which will take place during the summer of next year in Toronto. If you take the Crucified and Risen One as your guide, you will always be blessed.
"You are the salt of the earth ... you are the light of the world". With these words, the theme of the next World Youth Day in Toronto, I address all the Spanish-speaking young people. Take this joyful yet demanding message to all your companions. You can count on my prayers and closeness in this great adventure of evangelization.
Dear Portuguese-speaking young people, witnesses to the handing over of the Cross to your peers from Canada, my cordial greetings to you, your families and your ecclesial groups. I wish you all great solidarity of heart and life close to the crosses of so many crucified people.
May the Cross that we are handing over today to the young people from Toronto also be a light for you on your way through life. On this occasion, I recall the World Youth Day at Jasna Góra in Czestochowa, which marked a turning point. I ask you always to keep alive that great event experienced years ago, and at the same time to keep on moving towards the future, just as the World Youth Days move from one place to another, from one country to another, from one continent to another, from the second to the third millennium. God bless you!
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 1 April 2001
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. Today we begin the last stage of our Lenten journey, which next Sunday will bring us into Holy Week. As we approach the great event of Easter, we hear Jesus' invitation more pressing than ever: "If anyone would come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross daily and follow me" (Lk 9: 23).
This demanding condition, which Jesus sets for anyone who wishes to follow him, must form the Christian lifestyle, which Lent urges us to examine, renew and deepen. Jesus does not propose mortification as an end in itself. In fact, "denying oneself" and "taking up one's cross" mean thoroughly accepting one's responsibility before God and our neighbour. The Son of God was faithful to the mission entrusted to him by the Father, to the point of shedding his blood for our salvation. He asks his followers to do the same by giving themselves without reserve to God and to their brethren.
By treasuring these words of his, we discover how Lent is the time for a fruitful deepening of our faith. It has a lofty educational value, particularly for young people, who are called to give clear direction to their lives. To each of them Christ says again: "If anyone would come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross daily and follow me".
2. Dear young people, this is precisely the theme of my Message for the 16th World Youth Day, which will be celebrated next Sunday, Palm Sunday, in every Diocese.
Christ is demanding with his disciples, and the Church does not hesitate to repropose his Gospel to you "without shortcuts". Those who are taught by the Divine Master lovingly embrace his Cross, which leads to the fullness of life and happiness. Is it not the Cross which for 15 years now has led the pilgrimage of young people on the occasion of the World Youth Days?
Next Sunday at the end of the Holy Mass in St Peter's Square, this Cross, which has traveled around the world, will be handed over by Rome's young people to those of Toronto, the Canadian city that will host the World Youth Meeting in July 2002.
3. To prepare ourselves for this inspiring ceremony, I invite you, dear young people of Rome, to come here, to St Peter's Square, next Thursday afternoon. We will spend a time of prayer, reflection and celebration together. I am expecting you in large numbers and, while waiting to meet you, I entrust you and your peers from every nation and continent to the Blessed Virgin, that she may lead you to meet her Son, Jesus.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 25 March 2001
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. Today, 25 March, is the Annunciation of the Lord, but this feast, so deeply rooted in the tradition of the People of God, has been postponed until tomorrow since it coincides with the Fourth Sunday of Lent.
However, we can see a significant connection between today's liturgy of "Laetare Sunday", permeated with mercy and joy, and the Solemnity of the Annunciation. Whereas today we have in some way a foretaste of the light and joy of the paschal mystery, the Solemnity of the Annunciation takes us back to the source of spiritual joy, which is the Incarnation of the Son of God.
My mind returns to the intense moments of the celebration, precisely on this day last year, at which I presided in the Basilica of the Annunication in Nazareth. With deep emotion I knelt in the humble grotto where Mary heard the angel's words and said her "fiat", making herself totally docile to God's will.
2. Today we want to thank God in a special way for the gift of salvation, which Christ brought to the world by his Incarnation:  "Et Verbum caro factum est - The Word became flesh". From contemplation of this mystery all believers can draw renewed spiritual energy for proclaiming and constantly bearing witness to Christ, our only salvation, and for faithfully serving the "Gospel of life" that he entrusts to us.
Faced with the culture of death and attacks against human life that, unfortunately, are increasing, may we never fail to defend it at every stage, from the first moment of conception to its natural end. May humanity experience a new springtime of life, with respect and acceptance for every human being, in whose face shines the image of Christ!
For this let us together beseech Her who is "a living word of comfort for the Church in her struggle against death" (Evangelium vitae, n. 105).
After the Angelus
Yesterday, 24 March, Italy celebrated the annual Day of Prayer and Fast for Martyred Missionaries. This initiative, organized by the Youth Movement of the Pontifical Mission Societies, invites ecclesial communities to remember the men and women who died for their fidelity to Christ and the Gospel. In the year 2000, 29 names, including four Italians, were added to this already numerous group. May their sacrifice, united with that of Christ, be a leaven of love, justice and peace, so that the kingdom of God will grow in history.
I extend a cordial greeting to you, dear German-speaking brothers and sisters. I particularly welcome the pilgrim group from St Gertrude's Parish in Schuld. May the Lord strengthen your faith and accompany you on your journey through life. I gladly give you my Apostolic Blessing.
I affectionately greet the Italian-speaking pilgrims, in particular the faithful from Treviglio, led by Bishop Giuseppe Merisi, Auxiliary of Milan, and those from Brescia, Montirone and Pontevico; and I welcome the students, teachers and  parents from  Il  Caminetto School in Chiaverano, Diocese  of Ivrea, and the confirmandi from Villafranca Padovana.
I also greet the members of the various groups and movements that are actively working against abortion and in favour of life. Recalling the day on which Mary conceived the Child Jesus, I would like to send a special blessing to women who are expecting a child and especially to those who are in difficult situations. I say to them all:  a child conceived is always an invitation to live and to hope.
I also extend a greeting to the Association of Italian and Foreign Lorry Drivers, who wanted to be linked with us by television from the Parma Fair.
I greet all the Polish pilgrims and those who have joined in our prayer by radio and television, and, starting today, through Puls Television as well. I greet the professors and students from the Church History Faculty of the Theological Academy of Kraków, the parish in Zielonka near Warsaw, the families from Radomsk and Warsaw, the group of Poles from Philadelphia and the individual pilgrims. God bless you all!
I wish everyone a peaceful Sunday and a happy feast of the Annunciation.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 18 March 2001
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. Tomorrow, 19 March, we will celebrate the feast of St Joseph. In the midst of Lent the liturgy points out this saint to us as an example to follow and a protector to call upon.
For us, St Joseph is first of all a model of faith. Like Abraham, he always lived with an attitude of total abandonment to divine Providence and thus offers us an encouraging example, especially when we are asked to take God "at his word", that is, without clearly seeing his design.
We are also called to imitate him in the humble practice of obedience, a virtue which shines in his silence and hidden life of hard work. How valuable is the "school" of Nazareth for contemporary man, who is beset by a culture that so often exalts appearances and success, autonomy and a false idea of individual freedom! How necessary it is, on the contrary, to rediscover the value of simplicity and obedience, of respect and the loving search for God's will!
2. St Joseph lived at the service of his Wife and Divine Son; for believers, he thus became an eloquent example of how "to reign" is "to serve". He can be seen as a helpful lesson in life especially by those who have the task of being "fathers" and "guides" in the family, at school and in the Church. I am particularly thinking of fathers, who are celebrating their feast on the day dedicated to St Joseph. I am also thinking of those whom God has appointed in the Church to exercise spiritual fatherhood. Allow me to mention, among these, the nine Bishops whom I will have the joy of ordaining tomorrow in St Peter's Basilica. I ask you to pray for them and for all the Church's Pastors.
May St Joseph, whom the Christian people invoke with trust, always guide the steps of God's family; may he especially help those who carry out the role of physical or spiritual fatherhood. May Mary, Joseph's virginal Wife and Mother of the Redeemer, accompany our prayer and intercede for us.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus and giving his Blessing, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims in their various languages.
I extend a special greeting to all the fathers and am delighted to encourage the "Adopt a Father" campaign organized by the Catholic Liaison Committee for a Civilization of Love. This is a new form of long-distance adoption which, through the direct agency of missionaries, guarantees dignified work for the heads of families in very poor countries. I cordially bless this initiative, which helps to keep families together and contributes to building a world of greater brotherhood and solidarity.
I cordially greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims, particularly the group from Sts Michael and Sebastian Parish in Valencia. I encourage you to continue the journey of radical conversion to the Gospel so that you can bear abundant fruits at Easter. God bless you.
I also greet a group of men and women religious, priests and lay people from Brazil who are visiting several Roman basilicas in a spirit of penance and solidarity with the "Campaign for Fraternity", whose theme this year is "Life, yes; drugs, no". I ask God that this Lenten pilgrimage will be joined with that of all Brazilians who aspire to a better future of peace and goodness for their whole country. Praised be Our Lord Jesus Christ!
I greet the parish priest and pilgrims from the parish in Breznica, Slovenia. May your visit to the Eternal City strengthen your faith and increase your apostolic zeal. For this I give you my Apostolic Blessing.
Lastly, I greet the Italian-speaking pilgrims, with a special thought for the parish groups from Castel San Pietro, from the Diocese of Lugano, Switzerland, and from Albosaggia near Sondrio in the Diocese of Como; I also greet the 14-year-olds from the St John Bosco Oratory in Villasanta (Milan), who are preparing to make their "profession of faith", and the pupils of Our Lady of Victories Nursery School in Ripa Teatina, Province of Chieti.
I wish everyone a pleasant Sunday.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 11 March 2001
  1. Before ending this solemn celebration, I would like to extend my cordial greetings and thanks to all of you, dear brothers and sisters, who by your presence show a deep devotion to these new blesseds.
With them let us now turn our gaze to Mary Most Holy, whom we contemplate in faith as Queen of the Saints of every era and nation. In particular, she is the Mother and Queen of Martyrs, standing beside them in their hour of trial, just as she remained at the foot of the Cross, close to her Son, Jesus.
These new blesseds trusted in her, the faithful Virgin, during the dramatic moments of their persecution. When they were prevented from expressing their faith freely, or later in prison, they found constant support in the Holy Rosary, recited alone or in small groups, for facing the supreme moment. How effective is this traditional Marian prayer in its simplicity and depth! The Rosary gives powerful help to countless believers in every age.
2. May it be so for us as well! Let us ask this of Our Lady in the Angelus prayer. Let us pray, in particular, for the Christian communities that are suffering persecution for the faith, so that, by the power of the Holy Spirit, they may bear witness to the love of Christ, who, "when he suffered, he did not threaten; but he trusted to him who judges justly" (1 Pt 2: 23).
May Mary, Mother of Hope, obtain for us a close union with Christ at the time of trial, so that we can experience the shining glory of his Resurrection.
I would like to extend a cordial greeting to all the pilgrims who have come to Rome to take part in this joyful occasion, especially the Cardinals, Archbishops and Bishops accompanying them, as well as the authorities who have come as representatives of a people who have given so many examples of holiness in all social classes and in every corner of their land.
May the new blesseds, models of consistency of life, constancy in faith and the spirit of reconciliation, intercede in heaven for their compatriots today and spur them to maintain the vigour of the Christian wisdom that makes their country's history fruitful and nourishes their efforts to reach ever higher peaks of harmony, solidarity and the spirit of Christian brotherhood.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 4 March 2001
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. A few days ago we began Lent, a time of prayer and penance which calls us to measure ourselves in a particular way against the demands of the divine Teacher, who said: "If any man would come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross and follow me" (Mt 16: 24); and again: "where I am, there shall my servant be also" (Jn 12: 26). He is speaking not only to the disciples but to everyone when he says: "He who loves his life loses it, and he who hates his life in this world will keep it for eternal life" (Jn 12: 25).
2. What do "denying oneself" and "hating one's life" mean? These words, wrongly understood, have sometimes portrayed Christianity as a religion that humiliates man, whereas Jesus came so that man might have life and have it abundantly (cf. Jn 10: 10). The fact is that Christ, unlike the false teachers of the past and present, does not deceive. He knows the human creature in his depths and knows that, in order to attain life, he must go through a "passage", a "passover", from the slavery of sin to the freedom of God's children by renouncing the "old man" to make way for the new man, redeemed by Christ.
"He who loves his life loses it". These words do not express contempt for life but, on the contrary, authentic love for it: a love that does not want this fundamental good instantly and only for itself, but for all people and for all time, in sharp contrast with the mentality of the "world". In fact, it is by following Christ on the "narrow way" that we find life; those who choose the "broad" and comfortable way instead, exchange life for fleeting pleasures, disregarding their own dignity and that of others.
3. Therefore let us joyfully continue on our demanding Lenten journey, seeking to express our inner renewal in concrete personal, ecclesial and social choices. Mary Most Holy, who always goes before us in following her Son Jesus, is close to us on this journey and sustains us when the struggle against the spirit of evil becomes more difficult and arduous. Let us entrust Lent to her, so that it will be a time of profound conversion for the entire Christian people.
We also ask her to accompany the Roman Curia which will be participating, with me, in the spiritual exercises that begin this evening. We are also counting on you, dear brothers and sisters, to remember us to the Lord, so that these days of intense listening to the Spirit of God, of silence and of constant prayer may bear the desired fruits of spiritual renewal.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 25 February 2001
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. The recent Consistory for the creation of 44 new Cardinals, a few weeks after the conclusion of the Holy Year, will surely be recorded in the Church's annals. I would like to reflect once again on this event and its significance, which concerns not only the new Cardinals and the Ecclesial Communities from which they come, but the entire family of God and its mission in the world today.
The Christian people have been filled in a way with a breath of renewed hope. During the Jubilee and in these recent days we have heard the powerful invitation to set our gaze on the future. The Church looks ahead and wants "to put out into the deep", enlivened by the spiritual energy inspired within her by the Jubilee experience. This energy can only strengthen and enrich the elements that belong, so to speak, to the Ecclesial Community's genetic code:  its unity, holiness, catholicity and apostolicity. The increase in the College of Cardinals, while showing the unity of the Ecclesial Body around the Successor of Peter, stresses its catholic dimension reflected in the fact that the Cardinals come from every part of the world.
2. The question arises: how can the Church remain faithful to her vocation at a time when the dominant culture often seems contrary to the demanding logic of the Gospel? This question is symbolically answered by the red colour of the Cardinals' robes. They recall, as you know, the blood of the martyrs, who bore witness to Christ even to the supreme sacrifice. By their lives Cardinals must visibly show a love for Christ that does not shrink from any sacrifice. Their example will encourage all Christians generously to serve the divine Master and to feel that they are living members of his one Mystical Body which is the Church.
A necessary condition for this demanding task is devout contemplation of the Lord's face. I wrote this in the Apostolic Letter Novo millennio ineunte and I have had many occasions to reaffirm it. For, if there is no listening to the word of God, if prayer and interior contact with the Lord grow weak, it is easy to fall into a sterile activism, which unfortunately is a frequent risk, particularly in our day.
3. Let us invoke the special assistance of Mary, Mother of the Church, for the new Cardinals. As we recite the Angelus together, let us ask her to obtain for all believers a generous impulse to bear more convinced and faithful witness to the Gospel.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II 
ANGELUS
Sunday, 18 February 2001
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. This morning I had the joy of presiding at a Divine Liturgy in St Peter's Basilica on the occasion of the 1,700th anniversary of the Baptism of the Armenian people. Historical tradition, in fact, establishes 301 as the date of their conversion to the Christian faith, when King Tiridates III, his relatives and the entire community were baptized by St Gregory, called "the Illuminator". Since then the Gospel and Armenian identity have journeyed together inseparably.
Armenia is thus considered the first nation to have embraced Christianity, even before it was accepted in the Roman Empire.
2. In reviewing the 17 centuries of this people's history, we note how martyrdom is a constant element in that history. On various occasions Armenians have had to pay with harsh suffering for their intention to remain faithful to their Christian identity, down to the tragic events at the end of the 19th century and in the first years of the 1900s. On this special occasion we wish to pay homage to the sacrifice of Armenian Christians, including those in the diaspora, who took the light of the Gospel with them and preserved all their spiritual and cultural heritage.
As we affectionately salute these brothers and sisters, we assure them of the constant solidarity of the whole Church. Armenia is the cradle of a unique civilization, as its treasures of art and culture testify. Having endured so many difficult moments, may it now live in peace and contribute its particular genius to the cultural and spiritual growth of humanity.
3. We entrust these wishes to Mary Most Holy, whom our Armenian brethren venerate with deep devotion. Their liturgy has a distinctly Marian character; they call the Virgin Astvazazin, Mother of God, and address her with the title "Queen of Armenia". One of Our Lady's principal poets is the great doctor of the Armenian Church, St Gregory of Narek. May the Blessed Virgin always protect the beloved Armenian people and lead them into a season of renewed hope and prosperity.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father spoke of the second earthquake in El Salvador, called for dialogue in the Middle East and mentioned his recent Letter to the Diocese of Rome.
At this time of prayer, I would like to assure the people of El Salvador, suffering once again from a violent earthquake, that I am close to them. I trust that international solidarity will not fail to offer its generous support to that beloved nation.
I cannot forget that, unfortunately, violence is still raging in the Middle East. Every day we learn with sorrow, especially from Israel and the Palestinian Territories, that new human lives are being sacrificed to the logic of hatred and revenge, while the prospects of peace seem more and more distant. Let us pray that the spiral of violence, particularly atrocious in recent times, will give way to the search for mutual trust and respect, so that the path of dialogue will be resumed with determination and may lead at last to peace in justice.
Yesterday the Letter was published which I wanted to address to the faithful of the Diocese of Rome after the exceptional experience of the Great Jubilee, inviting everyone to remember the road traveled in recent years from the Pastoral Synod to the City Mission. Enriched by these authentic gifts of God, now it is time to plan for the future. That is what the Church of Rome is intending to do at a great Convention, scheduled for next June, which is now being prepared in the parishes and in every ecclesial setting. In my daily prayer I am accompanying the Cardinal Vicar, the Bishops, the priests and the beloved Roman faithful in this new spiritual and apostolic endeavour.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 11 February 2001
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. Today, the liturgical memorial of Our Lady of Lourdes, the World Day of the Sick is being celebrated. The place designated this year for the significant event is Sydney, Australia, where Archbishop Javier Lozano Barragán, President of the Pontifical Council for Health Pastoral Care, went with his assistants. Every diocesan community, moreover, is turning its attention to the sick and to health-care workers. In St Peter's Basilica the traditional Eucharistic celebration will also take place this afternoon, with Cardinal Camillo Ruini presiding. At the end of Mass I myself will come down to meet the sick and pilgrims attending.
In my Message for this World Day, published on 22 August last year, I reflected on the theme: "The New Evangelization and the Dignity of the Suffering Person". Hospitals, centres for the sick or the elderly and every home where human suffering is present are privileged settings for proclaiming the Gospel message of hope. It is therefore important at the beginning of the third millennium to give new energy to the Church's age-old involvement in the world of health care, a genuine workshop for the civilization of love.
2. Looking at the current world situation, I cannot forget that many, too many, brothers and sisters still lack necessary health care. This is a grave injustice which urgently demands effort on everyone's part, starting especially with those who have greater political and economic responsibilities.
On this significant occasion, I would like to give credit to everyone, individuals, religious institutions and non-governmental organizations, who devote themselves with admirable care to the service of the sick and the suffering. I am thinking specifically of the host of men and women religious who work along with many lay people at hospitals and small health-care centres in the poorest countries amid problems and conflicts, risking their lives to save those of their brethren. I encourage them all to persevere in this praiseworthy task, which in many nations is leading to a vast and providential sensitizing of consciences.
3. Let us now turn our gaze to the Blessed Virgin. The cathedral of Sydney, where solemn Mass is being celebrated, with Cardinal Edward Bede Clancy, Archbishop of that city, presiding in my name, is dedicated to St Mary Auxilium Christianorum, "Help of Christians". For nine years, in various parts of the world, this appointment with suffering and hope has been renewed under the sign of Our Lady of Lourdes. Let us entrust to her the sick of the whole world and all who put their professional skill and sometimes their whole lives at their service.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the Italian, Spanish and Ukrainian pilgrims. To the Ukrainians he said:
I am very pleased to greet a group of Ukrainian pilgrims. Dear friends, I hope that your visit to St Peter's tomb and to Rome's other holy places will strengthen your faith and spirit of communion with the universal Church. As I anxiously wait to visit your homeland, I cordially give my Apostolic Blessing to you, your loved ones and the Ukrainian people.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 4 February 2001
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. "Duc in altum - Put out into the deep" (Lk 5: 4): Christ spoke these words to Peter after he and his companions had toiled all night without catching anything. We heard them in the Gospel of this Sunday's liturgy:  after preaching to the crowds precisely from Peter's boat, Jesus said to him: "Put out into the deep and let down your nets for a catch" (Lk 5: 4). Trusting in him, Simon and the other Apostles cast their nets and caught a great number of fish (cf. Lk 5: 5-6).
2. "Duc in altum - Put out into the deep". The Lord's invitation is the key phrase, almost the "motto" of the Apostolic Letter "Novo millennio ineunte - At the beginning of the new millennium", which, as you will recall, I signed on this past solemnity of the Epiphany, during the closing celebration of the Great Jubilee.
As the Successor of Peter, I feel it my duty to echo these words of Christ to the whole Church. Christ, who "is the same yesterday and today and for ever" (Heb 13: 8), urges every Ecclesial Community to "put out into the deep", to go forward in hope into the new millennium, which opens before us like a vast ocean on which to venture (cf. Novo millennio ineunte, n. 58).
Indeed, the immense wealth of grace received throughout the Jubilee now must be put into practice in resolutions and guidelines for action.
3. "Duc in altum - Put out into the deep" (Lk 5: 4): today I say this again to every Bishop and to each Diocesan Community. Now is the acceptable time for new spiritual and pastoral enthusiasm, not something unrealistic but based on the deep, powerful experience of grace we have had during the Jubilee year.
Dear brothers and sisters, let us look to the Blessed Virgin, our model of indomitable hope. After receiving the Angel's message and conceiving the Word made flesh, she set out in haste to visit her elderly cousin Elizabeth, who needed her help (cf. Lk 1: 39).
The Church, too, after intensely reliving the mystery of the Incarnation during the Jubilee, is now called to "put out into the deep", so that Christ can reach the individuals and peoples of every continent. She follows the example of Mary and counts on her support and intercession. We now confidently turn to her with the Angelus prayer.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father spoke about Pro-Life Day in Italy and greeted the pilgrims.
Today the 23rd Pro-Life Day is being celebrated in Italy, an occasion to sensitize people to the value of human life and to the dangers that unfortunately threaten it. I gladly support the Italian Bishops, who in their message have chosen the theme: "Every child is a word", to recall that every child is a word spoken to parents, who are called to welcome it and understand it, and a word addressed to society, to which a child makes his own contribution and from which expects to be helped in his development.
As I express my appreciation of those who work more directly at the service of children, the sick and the elderly, I affectionately greet the many faithful of Rome who have gathered here, led by the Cardinal Vicar and several Auxiliary Bishops. The Diocese of Rome devotes special attention to Pro-Life Day and prolongs it with the "Week for Life and the Family", being observed this year for the eighth time. I offer my best wishes for the success of this initiative and encourage the work of counselors, associations and movements committed to supporting life and the family.
I also greet the Confirmation candidates from St Roch's Parish in Vernazza, Genoa.
I extend a cordial greeting to the faithful from St Bridget's Parish in Vienna and to everyone here from German-speaking countries. May the Lord strengthen you in faith and guide you on your way through life. I gladly give you my Apostolic Blessing.
I cordially greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims, particularly the groups from the parishes in San Lorenzo, San Andrés and El Esparragal de Murcia. May God bless you in your family and professional life, and may you give proof of your fidelity to Christ and his Church. Thank you very much.
I wish everyone a pleasant Sunday!
    © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 28 January 2001
  1. With great affection I greet the many young people of Rome and Lazio gathered in St Peter's Square for the "World Day of Peace" organized by Catholic Action Youth. Thank you, dear friends, for coming along with your parents, priests and teachers!
During this month of January, which saw the close of the Great Jubilee, you have been working on the theme of the dialogue between cultures, which I proposed in my Message of 1 January for the World Day of Peace. It is important that children and young people, especially if they are Christians, grow up with a mentality that is open to meeting every person, learning to recognize one another as a brother or sister. This is the way we become apostles of peace. I tell you and all the young people of Italy, beginning with those of ACR:  the Church is counting on you, so that humanity will no longer experience the aberrations of racial, ethnic and religious hatred. In this connection, how can we forget that "Memorial Day" was celebrated yesterday in Italy, a day instituted precisely in order not to forget the horrors of the Shoah and of every other human aberration caused by the rejection of dialogue between different cultures and religions. May the doves that your representatives will release from this window be a sign of solidarity and peace for the new year just begun.
2. Following on what I had said earlier last Sunday, I am now pleased to announce the names of the Cardinals whom I had reserved "in pectore" at the Consistory of 21 February 1998.
They are:
- Archbishop Marian Jaworski of Lviv for Latins, Ukraine;
- Archbishop Jlnis Pujats of Riga, Latvia.
On Sunday I also had some other names "in pectore", that is in my heart, whose announcement I saw fit to postpone for various reasons until today. They too, in derogation from the fixed numerical limit, will be included among the Cardinals I will create at the Consistory of 21 February.
They are, first of all:
- Archbishop Lubomyr Husar, M.S.U., newly elected Major Archbishop of Lviv for Ukrainians.
In him, as well as in the two other prelates just mentioned, I intend to honour their respective Churches, which were harshly tried, especially during the 20th century, and offered the world the example of so many Christian men and women who bore witness to their faith amid sufferings of every kind, often culminating in the sacrifice of their lives.
The other names are those of the following praiseworthy Pastors:
- Archbishop Johannes Joachim Degenhardt of Paderborn, Germany;
- Archbishop Julio Terrazas Sandoval, C.SS.R. of Santa Cruz de la Sierra, Bolivia;
- Archbishop Wilfrid Fox Napier, O.F.M. of Durban, South Africa;
- Bishop Karl Lehmann of Mainz, Germany.
3. We now entrust these generous Pastors to the protection of the Blessed Virgin, so that she may help them to continue their service with renewed dedication to their respective Churches, inspiring in them further fruits of the Great Jubilee we have just celebrated.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father expressed his closeness to the victims of the earthquake in India and to those afflicted with leprosy. Accompanied by two members of Catholic Action Youth, he then released doves from his study window as a sign of peace:
With great concern I am following the news from India, where two days ago there was a very violent earthquake, which has claimed thousands of lives and caused widespread damage. The emergency was still being dealt with in El Salvador, when suddenly there was a new, even more devastating earthquake. I ask everyone to join their moral and material forces, so that our suffering brethren will not lack the necessary aid. As I pray for the victims, I assure the Indian and Pakistani peoples, stricken by such an immense disaster, of my closeness and my sentiments of deep solidarity.
I would also like to promise my solidarity and a special remembrance in prayer to those with leprosy, whose annual "World Day" is being observed today. I express my appreciation to all who are committed in various ways to overcoming Hansen's disease, and I am close to those stricken with it. In particular, I greet the Italian Association of the Friends of Raoul Follereau, which actively works to sensitize public opinion to this disease, asking everyone for the necessary contribution to eradicate it once and for all.
I also greet the parish groups from Genoa, Chiavari and Romito Magra, wishing them a fruitful pilgrimage to the tombs of the Apostles.
Together with the children of Catholic Action here at my side, I will now release several doves as a sign of peace for all humanity.
A pleasant Sunday to all!
    © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 21 January 2001
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. Throughout the world the Week of Prayer for Christian Unity is being celebrated, which this year takes its theme from Christ's words: "I am the way, and the truth, and the life". It will close with the solemn ecumenical celebration, at which I will have the joy of presiding in the Basilica of St Paul-Outside-the-Walls next Thursday, 25 January, at 11.00. This year it has exceptional importance, because it will be held a few days after the close of the Great Jubilee, during which we professed with ever new joy that Christ is the only Saviour of the world "yesterday, today and for ever".
The quest for unity is one of the most demanding tasks to which Christ's disciples are called at the beginning of the new millennium. It is in this perspective of faith that we head for the future. May the Lord grant us the inexhaustible strength of his Spirit, who is capable of ever new surprises!
2. I now have the joy of announcing that on 21 February next, the eve of the feast of the Chair of St Peter, I will hold a Consistory at which, derogating once again from the numerical limit set by Pope Paul VI and confirmed by me in the Apostolic Constitution Universi Dominici gregis (cf. n. 33), I will appoint 37 new Cardinals. Here are their names:
1. Archbishop Giovanni Battista Re, titular Archbishop of Vescovìo, Prefect of the Congregation for Bishops;
2. Archbishop François Xavier Nguyên Van Thuân, titular Archbishop of Vadesi, President of the Pontifical Council for Justice and Peace;
3. Archbishop Agostino Cacciavillan, titular Archbishop of Amiternum, President of the Administration of the Patrimony of the Apostolic See;
4. Archbishop Sergio Sebastiani, titular Archbishop of Caesarea in Mauretania, President of the Prefecture for the Economic Affairs of the Holy See;
5. Archbishop Zenon Grocholewski, titular Archbishop of Agropoli, Prefect of the Congregation for Catholic Education;
6. Archbishop José Saraiva Martins, C.M.F., titular Archbishop of Thuburnica, Prefect of the Congregation for the Causes of Saints;
7. Archbishop Crescenzio Sepe, titular Archbishop of Grado, General Secretary of the Committee for the Great Jubilee;
8. Archbishop Jorge María Mejía, titular Archbishop of Apollonia, Archivist and Librarian of the Holy Roman Church;
9. Patriarch Ignace Moussa I Daoud, Prefect of the Congregation for the Oriental Churches;
10. Archbishop Mario Francesco Pompedda, titular Archbishop of Bisarcio, Prefect of the Supreme Tribunal of the Apostolic Signatura;
11. Bishop Walter Kasper, Bishop emeritus of Rottenburg-Stuttgart, Secretary of the Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity;
12. Archbishop Antonio José González Zumárraga of Quito, Ecuador;
13. Archbishop Ivan Dias of Bombay, India;
14. Archbishop Geraldo Majella Agnelo, Archbishop of São Salvador da Bahia, Brazil;
15. Archbishop Pedro Rubiano Sáenz of Bogotá, Colombia;
16. Archbishop Theodore Edgar McCarrick of Washington, United States of America;
17. Archbishop Desmond Connell of Dublin, Ireland;
18. Archbishop Audrys Juozas Backis of Vilnius, Lithuania;
19. Archbishop Francisco Javier Errázuriz Ossa of Santiago, Chile;
20. Archbishop Oscar Andrés Rodríguez Maradiaga, S.D.B. of Tegucigalpa, Honduras;
21. Archbishop Bernard Agré of Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire;
22. Archbishop Louis-Marie Billé of Lyons, France;
23. Archbishop Ignacio Antonio Velasco García, S.D.B. of Caracas, Venezuela;
24. Archbishop Juan Luis Cipriani Thorne of Lima, Peru;
25. Archbishop Francisco Alvarez Martínez of Toledo, Spain;
26. Archbishop Cláudio Hummes, O.F.M. of São Paulo, Brazil;
27. Archbishop Varkey Vithayathil, C.SS.R., Major Archbishop of Ernakulam-Angamaly for Syro-Malabars, India;
28. Archbishop Jorge Mario Bergoglio, S.J. of Buenos Aires, Argentina;
29. Patriarch José da Cruz Policarpo of Lisbon, Portugal;
30. Archbishop Severino Poletto of Turin, Italy;
31. Archbishop Cormac Murphy-O'Connor of Westminster, Great Britain;
32. Archbishop Edward Michael Egan of New York, United States of America.
I would also like to raise to the dignity of Cardinal two venerable prelates and three worthy ecclesiastics who deserve special praise for their dedicated service to the Church. They are:
1. Patriarch Stéphanos II Ghattas, C.M. of Alexandria for Copts;
2. Archbishop emeritus Jean Honoré of Tours;
3. Fr Roberto Tucci, S.J., Chairman of the Administrative Committee of Vatican Radio;
4. Mons. Leo Scheffczyk, from the Archdiocese of Munich and Freising;
5. Fr Avery Dulles, S.J., Professor emeritus of Fordham University, New York.
The new Cardinals come from various parts of the world. Their ranks well reflect the universality of the Church with the great variety of her ministries: along with prelates who deserve praise for their service to the Holy See are Bishops who spend their energies in direct contact with the faithful. I also have the intention of shortly announcing the names of the Cardinals I have kept "in pectore".
There are others who are very dear to me and would certainly deserve to be raised to the dignity of Cardinal for their service to the People of God. I hope that I will have an opportunity in the future to demonstrate, in this way too, my esteem and affection for them and for the countries to which they belong.
3. Let us entrust these newly chosen ones to the protection of Mary Most Holy, asking her to help them in their respective offices so that they can bear courageous witness in every circumstance to their love for Christ and the Church.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
I extend a cordial greeting to all the pilgrims. In particular my thoughts turn to the parish groups from Lipari, Messina, Gela, Niscemi, Praia a Mare, Padua, Venice and Bolzano. May your visit to St Peter's tomb strengthen your faith in Christ and your desire to bear witness to his love.
With my best wishes for a pleasant Sunday and a good week. Praised be Jesus Christ!
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 14 January 2001
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. This Sunday's Gospel recounts the miracle worked by Jesus at the wedding in Cana. It is the first "sign" by which he revealed his glory and instilled faith in his disciples (cf. Jn 2: 11).
As we meditate on this Gospel passage, it is natural to recall the Jubilee that just ended, a kind of great and memorable "sign" for the Church and for the world. A year in which Christ transformed the "water" of our spiritual poverty into the generous "wine" of renewal and commitment, as he did at Cana. And now that the Great Jubilee is over, we have gone back to our "ordinary" routine with greater enthusiasm, keeping our gaze more than ever firmly set on the Lord, as I wrote in my Apostolic Letter Novo millennio ineunte (cf. n. 16).
2. In today's Gospel it is Mary, the Mother of Jesus, who pleads for the wondrous change of water into wine. Again it is the Virgin who intercedes for us. This was also true for the transition from the second to the third millennium, when her Immaculate Heart proved a safe refuge for her many children. The Church could thus experience the signs of a renewed springtime, stirred up by the Second Vatican Council with which, "in the broadest sense of the term, the immediate preparations for the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000 were really begun" (Tertio millennio adveniente, n. 20).
The Holy Year has opened so many hearts to hope and has illumined the world's path with the light of Christ.
3. The Mother of Christ is now repeating to us, the men and women who confidently face the new millennium, her invitation to the servants during the wedding at Cana: "Do whatever he tells you" (Jn 2: 5). With these words, the Virgin apparently wants to encourage us not to be afraid of the limitations and failures that can sometimes mark our experience as individuals, as families and as ecclesial and civil communities. Mary urges us not to be depressed even by sin, which undermines our confidence in ourselves and in others. What matters is that we do whatever Christ tells us, trusting in him: he will never let our ceaseless prayer go unheard.
May Our Lady's invitation, which the Gospel renews today, open us to total abandonment to Jesus. For the Mother's words are echoed by the reassuring words of her divine Son: "Lo, I am with you always, to the end of the age" (Mt 28: 20).
After reciting the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted some pilgrim groups in Spanish, Serbian and Polish, and expressed his spiritual closeness to the earthquake victims in Central America.
I cordially greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims, especially the groups from Sacred Heart and St Francis Xavier Parishes. May God bless you in your family and professional life, and may you thus give proof of your fidelity to Christ and his Chuch. Many thanks.
Dear priests and young people from the Serbian Orthodox Diocese of Sabac-Valjevo, I cordially greet you. Welcome!
May your pilgrimage to the tombs of the holy Apostles Peter and Paul and of the other holy martyrs, whose memory is kept by Rome, strengthen your Christian faith and support you in your commitment to building, along with the other citizens of your country, a future of peace and development. On returning to your homeland, bring my affectionate greeting to His Beatitude Patriarch Pavle, to your Bishop Lavrentije, to your relatives and friends, and to the beloved Serbian people.
May our Lord Jesus Christ bless you all!
I also greet the pilgrims from Poland: the Neo-Catechumenal communities from Mogilno, the employees of a construction firm from Nowy Targ, a group of restorers and individual pilgrims. God bless you all!
A few hours ago we learned of a disastrous earthquake in Central America, which has caused many deaths, hundreds of injuries and enormous material damage, particularly in El Salvador. I would like to express my spiritual closeness to the peoples hit by the earthquake in that region, which is so dear to me. As I offer my heartfelt prayers to the Lord for the victims, I express my fervent encouragement to the survivors, hoping that the international community will show its active concern for them. May everyone's solidarity bring the help that can alleviate the consequences of this tragedy!
I wish all Romans and pilgrims a pleasant Sunday.
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 7 January 2001
  1. The Great Jubilee of the Year 2000 ended yesterday, the Solemnity of the Epiphany, and today we celebrate the feast of the Baptism of the Lord. I had the joy, as I do every year, of administering Baptism to a number of infants. In extending again an affectionate greeting to the families, I wish their children a future filled with the Lord's blessings.
2. Some Eastern Churches are celebrating Christmas today according to their calendar. On this joyous occasion I feel spiritually close to these dear brothers and sisters in faith, to whom I offer my most cordial wishes of joy and peace.
One with them in the faith and charity of Christ, I repeat today what I said on 25 December last in my Urbi et Orbi Message: "You, O Christ, whom we look on today in the arms of Mary, you are the reason for our hope! ... In you, only in you, is humanity offered the chance to become "a new creation'. Thank you, Child Jesus, for this your gift!".
3. In these days the deepest feeling in my heart is one of gratitude. Yesterday I was able to thank the Lord for the extraordinary gift of the Jubilee and those who generously worked to make its various events a success.
Today I feel obliged once again to express my most sincere thanks especially to the volunteers, who offered their services of welcome here in Rome, in Jerusalem and in many other shrines and basilicas, the destinations of many pilgrims. I do so as I address you, dear volunteers, who have just taken part in the Eucharistic celebration in the Vatican Basilica, at which Cardinal Roger Etchegaray, President of the Committee for the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000, presided.
In you, dear brothers and sisters, I see the nearly 70,000 volunteers, young people and adults from many countries, who came to this city of the Apostles throughout the Jubilee Year to serve the Holy Year pilgrims. Faithful to the motto written on your uniforms: "I was a stranger and you welcomed me" (Mt 25: 35), you accompanied thousands of people to the Holy Doors of the patriarchal basilicas. You were thus skilled guides, thoughtful helpers, privileged witnesses of God's wondrous deeds, experiencing the truth of the Lord Jesus' words: "It is more blessed to give than to receive" (Acts 20: 35).
On behalf of all the pilgrims, the Pope says "thank you"! And he hopes that you will treasure the experience you have had: as you return home, cherish in your hearts the Jubilee moments in which you took part and bring a "volunteer" attitude to everyday life, which will enable you to regard everyone you meet as a brother or sister to be loved and served, and will spur you to become builders of the civilization of love in the new millennium now beginning.
3. The United Nations has proclaimed 2001 as the International Year of Volunteers; in you I wish to salute and encourage all the world's volunteers, the men and women who freely offer some of their time in various forms of fraternal solidarity for the advancement and education of the human person, particularly by being close to the very poor and to those suffering materially and spiritually.
Volunteerism, in all its forms, is primarily a matter of the heart, of a heart that knows how to open itself to the needs of others, recognizing in them the highest human dignity, which reflects the greatness of God himself in whose image every human being is created (cf. Gn 1: 27; Mt 25: 40).
Dear volunteers, let us entrust all your good intentions to Mary by praying the Angelus.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus and imparting his Blessing, the Holy Father greeted some of the groups in St Peter's Square.
I affectionately greet all the pilgrims, particularly those who are taking part in the historic-folkloric parade "Viva la Befana", which is inspired this year by the traditions of Cisterna di Latina and the Pontine region. In a special way I bless the families and thank them for the characteristic gifts they have offered.
I extend a special greeting to the townspeople of Castel Gandolfo, where I was unable to go this year during the Christmas holidays. I want them to know that the Pope is thinking of them with special affection and wishes them a New Year filled with spiritual fruits and Christian prosperity!
A pleasant Sunday to all!
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
1 January 2001
  1. On this particular day we cannot fail to think of the Holy Land, where 2,000 years ago the angels proclaimed: "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace among men with whom he is pleased!" (Lk 2: 14).
This year, in a desire to be even closer to those peoples, I have sent Cardinal Roger Etchegaray as my representative to preside in those holy places over the celebration of the World Day of Peace. At the same time, he will present my Message to the Israeli and Palestinian authorities with an invitation to continue on the path of dialogue in order to achieve the peace so longed for, which is the essential basis for fruitful coexistence among all the world's peoples. The theme of the Message, "Dialogue between Cultures for a Civilization of Love and Peace", harmonizes well with the United Nations' decision to proclaim 2001 as the "International Year of Dialogue between Civilizations".
2. Dear brothers and sisters, our commitment to dialogue and peace is supported by the intercession of Mary, whom the liturgy celebrates today as the "Mother of God". In her earthly life she was able to learn, from meeting her Lord, to dialogue with others and to put herself willingly at their service.
At the beginning of the year 2001, we turn to her and invoke her motherly protection, so that men and women of every language, people and nation will learn to esteem one another and to share their own cultural riches in order to build together a new humanity.
3. In this perspective, I extend to the Italian people and to their President, Hon. Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, my cordial wishes for a happy New Year. May 2001 be for everyone a year of authentic progress in harmony and freedom! May the fruits of the Great Jubilee continue into the months ahead, bringing inner joy, peace and well-being to individuals, families and all society. May God grant everyone an abundance of his blessings!
On this first day of the year, I extend an affectionate greeting to you French-speaking pilgrims. I entrust you and your families to the intercession of the Virgin Mary, Mother of God. May she guide your steps each day and help you to discover the face of her divine Son, our Saviour, who gives true meaning to history!
At the beginning of this New Year, I extend my warmest greetings to the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors. May this be a time in which the spiritual fruits of the Jubilee will continue to bring joy and peace to many hearts. God bless you all!
I cordially greet all the pilgrims and visitors who have come from German-speaking countries. On this first day of the New Year, I wish you God's blessing and help for your life's journey in the third millennium. I cordially impart my Apostolic Blessing to you and your loved ones.
I affectionately greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims. In the new era which is beginning, I invite you to keep the call of faith alive in your hearts, in your families and in your communities, so that Christ can be the source of peace and hope for humanity. I wish you all a New Year filled with the Lord's blessings.
To all the Portuguese-speaking peoples and nations, to their homes, their political leaders and their institutions, I wish the peace of the One whom today we see lying in the arms of the Virgin Mary. Happy New Year!
I cordially greet the pilgrims from Poland and all my compatriots at home and abroad. I hope that the year now beginning will bring everyone an abundance of God's graces and will be filled with happiness and peace. God bless you!
  © Copyright 2001 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Feast of the Holy Family
Sunday, 29 December 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The liturgy of this Sunday, a few days after Christmas, invites us to contemplate the Holy Family of Nazareth, a wonderful model of human and supernatural virtues for all Christian families. Let us meditate on the mystery of this unique family: we can find in it values and teachings which today are more indispensable than ever to give human society sound and stable foundations.
2. How I would like the peace, harmony and love of the house in Nazareth to exist in families today! I ask the Lord with insistant prayer to make all Christian parents conscious of their irreplaceable task with regard to their children and to society. A true and effective Gospel witness is expected of them.
Every Christian family is called to show "convincingly that it is possible to live marriage fully in keeping with God's plan and with the true good of the human person - of the spouses, and of the children who are more fragile" (Novo Millennio ineunte, n. 47).
A united family that follows these principles will more easily overcome the trials and difficulties it encounters on its way. In the faithful love of the parents, a gift ceaselessly to foster and safeguard, children can find the best conditions for their growth, helped by Jesus who "increased in wisdom and in stature, and in favour with God and man" (Lk 2,52).
3. Today let us entrust to the Holy Family of Nazareth the families of the whole world, especially those that have been most harshly tried by suffering or are in difficulty. In particular, I would like to place the Fourth World Meeting of Families, scheduled to take place in Manila, the Philippines, from 22 to 26 January, under the special protection of the Blessed Virgin, of St Joseph and of the Infant Jesus. The theme chosen - The Christian family: good news for the third millennium - expresses the mission of every Christian family and the Church's confidence in it. May this important event bring the desired spiritual fruits for the Church and for all humanity!
After the Angelus
I greet the Italian-speaking pilgrims and in particular the faithful of the parish of the Nativity of the Virgin Mary in Talamona, Sondrio.
I then recall that on Tuesday, 31 December, at six o'clock in the evening I will preside at the First Vespers of the Solemnity of Blessed Mary, Mother of God. To conclude, in accordance with tradition, we will sing the Te Deum of thanksgiving for the year that is ending.
From this moment I offer everyone my cordial good wishes for peace and spiritual joy in the new year.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Feast of St. Stephen
Thursday, 26 December 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Wonder is still alive in our hearts at the extraordinary event we celebrated yesterday: the Word took on flesh in the Virgin Mary's womb and came to dwell among us.
Contemplating the crib, let us continue to savour the atmosphere of Christmas joy and revive our sentiments of gratitude to the Creator who chose, through love, to take on our human nature to share in our destiny and restore to us the hope of Heaven.
2. May St Stephen the Protomartyr, whom we commemorate today, help us understand more deeply the mystery we are living in the faith. The child stirring in a grotto is Christ, who asks us in every circumstance and all places to be courageous witnesses of his Gospel, precisely like the proto-deacon Stephen, who never wavered, even in the face of martyrdom.
Today too, so many believers in various parts of the world are subjected to trials and sufferings for their faith. Today's feast invites us to acquire a new consciousness of being called, as believers, to follow the Lord to the Cross without compromises, supported by the strength of his Spirit. May St Stephen help us never to fail in our Christian vocation.
For this let us ask Mary, Mother of the Redeemer and Queen of Martyrs, to intercede for us with the prayer of the Angelus.
After the Angelus
I see with pleasure in these hours that numerous families are visiting the Crib in the Square. Fathers and mothers are approaching the shelter "in procession" to pause and admire Mary and Joseph beside the Baby Jesus. May this scene of peace and joy awaken a renewed commitment of mutual love and reciprocal understanding in all people, so that they may live, especially within families, that atmosphere of understanding and communion which is so necessary for the peaceful growth of children.
To everyone I wish a happy Christmas season.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Fourth Sunday of Advent, 22 December 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The most thought-provoking reminder of the Lord's birth, about to take place, comes from the Nativity scene which has already been set up in many homes.
The simplicity of the Crib, however, is in strong contrast to that concept of Christmas which advertisements present insistently. Even the beautiful tradition of exchanging Christmas gifts between relatives and friends is under the influence of consumerism, which risks obscuring the true meaning of Christ's birth. Indeed, this tradition of exchanging gifts is to be understood in the perspective of God's gift to humanity in the person of Jesus, of which our gifts in this celebration are a reflection and expression. It is all the more important, for this reason, to favour actions that manifest solidarity and openness toward the poor and needy.
2. Looking at the Crib, our gaze is especially fixed on the Virgin and on Joseph, who await the birth of Jesus. The Gospel of this Fourth Sunday of Advent with its account of the Annunciation, presents Mary to us, in attentive listening to the Word of God, ready to fulfil it faithfully.
In her, and in her most chaste spouse, we see realized the indispensable conditions to prepare ourselves for Jesus' birth. In the first place, interior silence and prayer, which allow one to contemplate the mystery that is commemorated. In the second place, the willingness to accept the will of God, in whatever way it is manifested.
3. The "yes" of Mary and Joseph is all-encompassing and involves their entire person:  spirit, soul and body.
May it be this way for each one of us! May Jesus, who in a few days will come, making our Nativity scenes radiant with joy, find a generous welcome in every Christian family, as was the case in Bethlehem on that holy night.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father said: 
I greet with affection the pilgrims gathered here today. I thank all those who have sent me good wishes and in turn I cordially wish everyone peace and serenity. Happy Christmas!
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
III Sunday of Advent
15 December 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. There is already a Christmas atmosphere in St Peter's Square. Beside the crib, still being set up, stands the Christmas tree that Croatia has given this year. Let me repeat my thanks to our Croatian brothers and sisters for their kind gift.
Dear children and youngsters of Rome, you have come today to add a touch of liveliness in keeping with the tradition of having the Baby Jesus of your cribs blessed by the Pope. I greet you affectionately and thank you because your joy fits in very well with the spirit of joy that is appropriate for the Third Sunday of Advent.
I also think of the cribs that you and your parents and teachers have prepared in your homes and schools. In the manger, between Mary and Joseph, you will place the Baby Jesus you hold in your hands. The crib will become the centre of your classroom and the heart of your families.
Above all, Christmas is a feast of the family because, by being born in a human family, the Son of God chose it as the first community consecrated by his love.
2. Speaking of families, I want to call to your attention that from 22-26 January 2003, the Fourth World Meeting of Families will take place in Manila, the capital of the Philippines. The first was held in Rome in 1994, the International Year of the Family. Three years later it was followed by the extraordinary gathering in Rio de Janeiro; in the year 2000 the families of the whole world met in Rome for the Great Jubilee. The next appointment will serve to relaunch the Gospel of the family in the third millennium.
I thank all those who are busy with the preparation of this important meeting in Manila. I hope that there will be as great a participation of families as possible. The world needs a sign of hope that comes from Christian families.
3. From this day, I entrust this world appointment to the Blessed Virgin Mary, Queen of the family. We ask her to protect families everywhere in the world, especially those living in situations of great poverty and difficulty. May every family nucleus be able to open its doors to the Lord who will come at Christmas to bring to the world joy, peace and love.
This Sunday the Diocese of Rome relaunches the campaign for new churches and parish centres.
Christmas reminds us that God wants to dwell among us, in our homes, so that we can meet Him and live in communion with Him. Further, families know well how important it is to have in their neighbourhoods centres for the formation of their children and young people. For this reason, I invite you to support the endeavour of the diocese to achieve this important goal.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
SOLEMNITY OF THE IMMACULATE CONCEPTION
OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Second Sunday of Advent
8 December 2002
  Brothers and Sisters,
1. Every day when we pray the Angelus, we repeat three times: "And the Word was made flesh". During the season of Advent, these evangelical words assume a more intense meaning because the liturgy makes us relive the atmosphere of the expectation of the Incarnation of the Word.
For this reason, Advent is the ideal season for the Solemnity of Mary Immaculate. The humble young woman of Nazareth, who with her "yes' to the angel changed the course of history, was preserved from every stain of sin from the moment of her conception. In fact, Mary was the first one to benefit by the salvation brought about by Christ, chosen from all eternity to be his Mother.
2. For this reason, today we focus our attention on the mystery of the Immaculate Conception, while our heart opens to a heartfelt hymn of thanksgiving. The liturgy celebrates the wonders that God has accomplished through her: "The joy that Eve took from us, you give to us in your Son, and you open the way to the Kingdom of heaven" (hymn of Lauds).
At the same time, we are invited to imitate her. Mary was pleasing to God because of her docile humility. To the heavenly messenger, she replied, "Behold the handmaid of the Lord, let it be done to me according to your word" (Lk 1,38). It is with the same interior disposition that believers are called to accept the divine will in every circumstance.
3. "We follow you, Immaculate Virgin, drawn by your holiness" (antiphon of Lauds). So today, we turn to Mary, conscious of our weakness, but sure of her constant help as our Mother.
This afternoon I will happily renew the traditional homage to her in the Piazza di Spagna, making myself the interpreter of the devotion of the diocese of Rome and of the whole Church. I invite you, dear brothers and sisters, to join me in this act of Marian faith.
Let us now ask the Immaculate Virgin to help all Christians to be authentic disciples of Christ, so that in them faith may be ever more pure, hope ever more firm, and charity more generous.
After the Angelus:
I want to invite you to accompany with your prayer the political leaders who will meet in Copenhagen, Denmark on the coming 12 and 13 December to conclude important negotiations that concern the admission of new nations to the European Union. This continent can then be enriched with the contribution of the cultural and religious traditions of nations who down through the centuries have left us a prized common patrimony of civilization. May God show all Europeans how to become united so that they may continue to offer confidence and hope to other peoples.
To the Spanish-speaking
With affection I greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims, and in a special way the members of the "Work of the Church". The feast of the Immaculate Conception is deeply felt by so many towns and cities of Spain and of South America.
On this day I wish to express my closeness to the dear Galician people, who are passing through a time of uncertainty on account of the serious catastrophe that has damaged their coasts and endangers the self-sacrificing work of fishermen and the progress of the community. While I encourage all to work intensely to solve this difficult problem, I also ask God that helpful solutions may soon be found so that Galicia may regard its future with renewed hope.
To the Italians
I greet the Italian pilgrims and in particular the members of the Pontifical Academy of Mary Immaculate led by Cardinal Andrzej Maria Deskur. Beloved, on this solemn day, I offer my cordial best wishes to you for your initiatives.
May the Immaculate Virgin watch over all.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
First Sunday of advent
1 December 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today, with the First Sunday of Advent we begin a new liturgical year. The God of the covenant revealed himself in history and in history the Church celebrates the mystery of salvation: the Incarnation, Passion, Death and Resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ. In this way, the journey of believers is continually renewed, extending between what Christ has "already" realized and the "not yet" of his full revelation.
God is the future of the human person and of the world. If humanity loses the meaning of God, it will close itself to the future and inevitably lose the perspective of its pilgrim journey in time. Why birth, why death? Why sacrifice, why suffering?
To these questions, Christianity offers a satisfying answer. For this reason, Christ is the hope of humanity. He is the true meaning of our present, because he is our sure future.
2. Advent reminds us that he has come, and that he will come. The life of believers is a continuous and vigilant waiting for his coming. Today, the invitation to watch and to wait is underlined with insistence by St Mark, who, throughout the new liturgical year, will guide us in the discovery of the mystery of Christ.
In today's passage taken from the second of the great discourses of Jesus, the evangelist points out the final meaning of history and of creation and exhorts us to make of our lives an unceasing quest for Christ. From our being with him and from the contemplation of his countenance come the missionary vigour that will help us to leave our grey daily routine in order to be his courageous witnesses.
3. On this journey of conversion and of apostolic dedication, Mary, the bright dawn and the sure guide of our steps, accompanies us. She does it in a special way by inviting us to contemplate the joyful mysteries of the Rosary. We look to her with confidence while she prepares us to celebrate next Sunday the solemn feast of her Immaculate Conception.
To the English-speaking visitors
I extend a special welcome to the English-speaking visitors present for this Angelus prayer, and in particular to the Filipino groups and parish groups from the United States who have come to pray at the tomb of St Peter. Upon all of you and your families I invoke the maternal protection of the Blessed Virgin Mary.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 24 November 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today we celebrate the Solemnity of Christ the King of the universe. This feast was rightly assigned to the last Sunday of the liturgical year to emphasize that Jesus Christ is the Lord of history and that in Him the whole plan of creation and redemption reaches its fulfillment.
Through the Old Covenant, in the consciousness of the people of Israel, the Messiah-King receives his form. It is God himself who, especially through the prophets, reveals to the Israelites his will to gather them as a shepherd does his flock, so that they will live in freedom and peace in the promised land. To this end, he will send his Anointed One, in Greek the "Christ", to redeem the people from sin and to introduce them into the Kingdom.
Jesus of Nazareth brings this mission to fulfillment in the Paschal Mystery. He does not come to reign as the kings of the world do but to establish the divine power of Love in the heart of the human person, of history and of the cosmos.
2. The Second Vatican Council proclaimed forcefully and clearly to the contemporary world the lordship of Christ, and its message was taken up again in the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000. Humanity of the third millennium also needs to discover that Christ is its Saviour. This is the message that Christians should bring with renewed courage to the world of today.
In this regard, the Second Vatican Council pointed out the special responsibility of the lay faithful (cf. Decree Apostolicam actuositatem). In virtue of their Baptism and Confirmation, they participate in the prophetic mission of Christ. As a consequence they are called ""to seek the Kingdom of God by engaging in temporal affairs and by ordering them according to the plan of God'; they "have their own role to play in the mission of the whole people of God in the Church and in the world ... by their activity for evangelization and for the sanctification of people'" (Apostolic Letter Novo Millennio ineunte, n. 46).
3. Among all the angelic and earthly creatures, God has chosen the Virgin Mary to associate her in a singular way with the kingship of her Son made man. This is what we contemplate in the last glorious mystery of the Rosary. May Mary teach us to witness with courage to the Kingdom of God and to welcome Christ as the King of our lives and of the entire universe.
    © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 17 November 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today in Italy, the Day of Migrants is observed, an annual event that invites the ecclesial and civil community to reflect on this important and complex phenomenon.
The Italian Bishops have chosen as the theme for this day, a sentence of the Apostle Paul: "Welcome one another as Christ has welcomed you" (Rom 15,7). In welcoming every man in Christ, God made himself an "emigrant" in the paths of time to take to all the Gospel of love and peace. In contemplating this mystery, how can one not be open to welcome and recognize that every human being is a son of the one heavenly Father and, therefore, is our brother?
2. We live in a time of profound changes that affect persons, ethnic groups and peoples. Even today we can note serious inequalities, especially between the north and the south of this world.
This makes the earth, becoming increasingly a "global village", be for some unfortunately a place of poverty and privations, while others are busy accumulating great wealth. In this situation, the "other" risks being frequently considered a competitor, especially if he is "different" due to language, nationality and culture.
Because of this, it is important that the spirit of welcome be present everywhere, to be translated into the social behaviour of care, especially for the needy. Everyone is called to contribute to making a better world, starting in one's own circle of life and work. I very much hope that families, associations, ecclesial and civil communities will become ever more schools of hospitality, of civil fellowship and of fruitful dialogue. As for immigrants, they must know how to respect the laws of the state that has welcomed them and thus contribute to a better integration in the new social situation.
3. Mary, the Virgin of welcome, is the figure and model of the Church, who must be a welcoming home for all persons and peoples. To assume our humanity, God willed to knock at the heart of Our Lady, receiving a "yes" full of faith and love. May she help us to be open to the needs of our brothers and sisters, especially of those who are in great difficulty.
I wish to express my profound participation in the sorrow of the family members of those who, last Friday, had just finished praying and were the victims of a cowardly attack at Hebron in the Holy Land, a few steps from the tomb of the Patriarch Abraham whom we recognize as our common father in the faith.
While I pray for the eternal repose of all those who died, I ask the Lord to pour forth into all, the necessary courage to return to the path of justice and peace.
Every year, on this Sunday, we are invited to commemorate the victims of traffic accidents. As I pray the Lord especially to welcome into his love all who have died tragically in traffic accidents, I entrust to the tenderness of Our Lady the many injured, often permanently disabled, along with their families, and I appeal to everyone to show them solidarity. Lastly, I urge drivers from this moment to show respect for others by agreeing to drive carefully and responsibly.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 10 November 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. On this second Sunday of November, in Italy we observe Thanksgiving Day, promoted by the National Confederation of Farmers. It is beautiful and proper to thank God for the gifts received in the course of the year and to be grateful to the men and women who reap them from the earth with their work. Farmers, not often recognized in industrial societies, merit instead universal thanks for the essential service they render to the whole human family.
The protection of creation is a commitment for which all must feel responsible. As the Italian bishops said in their message, "we must never forget that the earth belongs to God, though put in human hands to govern it" (cf. Gn 1,28; n. 1). For this reason, a radical cultural change is necessary: there must be a "conversion" from the indiscriminate expoitation of its resources to a responsible stewardship of the goods that God gives us in creation.
2. The United Nations declared 2002 the "Year of the Mountain". For this reason, on Thanksgiving Day this year we consider in a particular way the sector of the mountains and remember the splendid gift that they represent for the human person. Mountains are always able to fascinate the human spirit to the point of being considered in the Bible a favourite place for meeting God. They become the symbol of the ascent of the human person to the Creator.
However, mountains are not only places of rest and vacation. For many people they are the realm of daily effort, often endured in solitude and isolation. Mountains are the patrimony of all, and must be respected, loved and carefully protected by all. In fact, they are a common good, whose integrity is of great value for all humanity.
3. How many times, when walking along mountain paths, we come across little churches and shrines dedicated to Mary. From on high, the Virgin Mother watches silently over her children.
Sunday's Gospel (cf. Mt 25,1-13) suggests to us that we recognize in her the "Wise Virgin", the model of the Church attentively awaiting the glorious return of Christ. We now invoke her with confidence, so that she may help us to be wise stewards of the riches and resources of nature.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 3 November 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Yesterday we celebrated the annual liturgical commemoration of all the faithful departed. A universal prayer was raised by the worldwide Church to the God of life and peace, so that he might welcome into his kingdom of infinite light all souls, especially the most abandoned and in need of his mercy.
The Christian prayer for those who died that distinguishes the month of November, can only take place in the light of Christ's resurrection. Indeed, the Apostle Paul says: "If Christ is not risen, your faith is in vain.... If we have hoped in Christ for this life only, we are the most miserable of all people. But Christ is risen from the dead, the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep" (I Cor 15, 17.19-20).
More than ever, the world today needs to rediscover the meaning of life and death in the perspective of eternal life. Outside it, modern culture, born to exalt the human person and his dignity, is paradoxically transformed into a culture of death, because, without the horizon of God, the person finds himself a prisoner in the world, overwhelmed by fear, and gives way to many collective and personal pathologies.
2. I am happy on this topic to quote a text of St Charles Borromeo whose feast we celebrate tomorrow. He wrote, "May my soul never cease to praise the Lord who never ceases to lavish gifts. It is a gift of God if, from being a sinner, you are called to justice; a gift of God if you are sustained so that you do not fall; a gift of God that you are given the strength to persevere until the end; the resurrection of your dead body will be a gift of God, so that not a hair of your head will be lost; the glorification after the resurrection will be a gift of God; and, finally, it will also be a gift of God to be able to praise him continually in eternity" (Homily, 5 September 1583).
While I invite you to mediate on these enlightening thoughts of the holy Archbishop of Milan, I take the opportunity to thank all those who, remembering the feast of St Charles, have sent me good wishes for my name day. I am especially grateful for your assurance of prayer, which I wholeheartedly return, invoking for you abundant heavenly graces.
3. Let us now turn to the Blessed Virgin Mary and ask her to sustain our prayer, especially, for the repose of the faithful departed. In this Year of the Rosary, let us readily place ourselves in the school of the Virgin Mary to contemplate with her the mystery of Christ dead and risen, hope of eternal life for everyone.
After the Angelus: for stricken community in Molise region
Today we all shared spiritually in the sorrow of the community of San Giuliano of Puglia, so stricken by the tragic loss of many of its children.
Once again, I wish to say to those dear families that the Pope is near them and prays for them, asking the Lord, through the intercession of Mary, Mother of mercy, the consolation of Christian faith and hope.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Solemnity of All Saints
Friday, 1 November 2002
 
Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today the Church, as the liturgy states, has "the joy of celebrating in one feast the merits and the glory of all the Saints" (Opening Prayer): not only of those whom she has canonized in the course of the centuries, but also of the numberless men and women whose holiness, hidden in this world, is only known to God and shines in his eternal kingdom.
In the spiritual atmosphere of the communion of Saints, I wish to recall nine Brothers and Sisters who were canonized in the past year: Alonso de Orozco, Ignazio da Santhià, Umile da Bisignano, Paulina of the Suffering Heart of Jesus, Benedetta Cambiagio Frassinello, Pio da Pietrelcina, Pedro de San José Betancur, Juan Diego of Guadalupe, Josemaría Escrivá de Balaguer.
Thinking of these illustrious witnesses of the Gospel, we give thanks to God, "source of all holiness" for having given them to the Church and to the world. With their example, they prove that, as the Council teaches, "All the faithful are called to the fullness of Christian life and to the perfection of charity" (Lumen gentium, n. 40), tending to the "high standard" of ordinary Christian life (cf. Apostolic Letter Novo Millennio ineunte, n.31).
2. Today's feast invites us to lift our eyes to heaven, the goal of our earthly pilgrimage. There the festive community of the saints awaits us. There we will have the company of our dear departed ones for whom we pray in tomorrow's solemn liturgical commemoration.
The faithful and families these days visit the cemeteries where the remains of their relatives lie in rest waiting for the final resurrection. I also return spiritually to the tombs of my dear ones which I had the chance to visit during my apostolic journey to Krakow.
The observance of 2 November asks us to remember, even in a certain sense to prefer, in our prayer the souls of the dead whom no one remembers, to entrust them to the embrace of divine mercy. I am thinking particularly of those who in the last year have left the world. Above all, I pray for the victims of bloody crimes that in the past months and even these days continue to afflict humanity. The commemoration of all the faithful departed can only be a universal prayer for peace:  peace for those who have lived, peace for those living and for those who will live.
3. We look to the Blessed Virgin Mary resplendent in glory in heaven whom Christ crowned Queen of Angels and Saints. To her, the "sign of certain hope and comfort" (Lumen gentium, n. 68), the pilgrim Church raises her eyes in the desire of being joined one day to the triumphant church in our heavenly fatherland. To the Blessed Virgin Mary we entrust all the faithful departed so that eternal happiness may be granted to them.
To the Polish faithful
Today and tomorrow we will be visiting the graves of our dearly loved ones, commending them to divine mercy.... We visit them in all of the parishes inside and outside of Poland, and we visit the tombs of the Polish soldiers of World War II, at Monte Cassino and other battlefields here in Italy.
After the Angelus
These days severe earthquakes have taken place in Sicily and in other areas of central-southern Italy, that have caused great suffering and trouble for those beloved peoples. Yesterday, a particular earthquake of great intensity shook the Molise region, with damage for the Puglia and the Abruzzo areas.
I desire to express my deep spiritual closeness to the persons affected by these tragic events, and I especially remember the the little children involved in the collapse of a school building in San Giuliano of Puglia. While in sadness I pray for the victims and their families, I want to encourage the survivors warmly and endorse those who are busy supplying assistance in the hope that they may be supported by the solidarity of the entire nation.
    © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 27 October 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. We are moving toward the end of the month of October, the month of the Rosary. As you know, the coming months, until October 2003, are a special "Year of the Rosary". In this way, I wished to place the 25th year of my pontificate under the sign of this prayer.
The most important reason for proposing again the praying of the Rosary is the fact that it constitutes a valid means of fostering among the faithful the commitment to the contemplation of the face of Christ, to which I invited everyone at the end of the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000.
2. The Virgin Mary is the unrivalled model of Christian contemplation (cf. Apostolic Letter Rosarium Virginis Mariae, n. 10). From Jesus' conception until his resurrection and ascension into heaven, the Mother kept the gaze of her immaculate heart on her divine Son: a wonderful, penetrating, sorrowful and radiant insight (cf. ibid.). It is this Marian look full of faith and love, that the individual Christian and the ecclesial community make their own when they recite the Rosary.
In order "to bring out fully the Christological depth of the Rosary" (ibid. n. 19), the Apostolic Letter Rosarium Virginis Mariae integrates the traditional three cycles of mysteries - of joy, sorrow, and glory - with a new cycle: the mysteries of light that recall the public life of Christ.
3. As is true of every genuine prayer, the Rosary does not remove us from reality, but helps us to live reality interiorly united with Christ, giving witness to the love of God. For this reason, the recent Letter exhorts us to rediscover the beauty of the recitation of the Rosary in the family. "The family that prays together stays together" (ibid., n. 41).
The Rosary is "prayer by its very nature oriented to peace". In this Year of the Rosary, Christians are called to keep their gaze fixed on Christ, the Prince of eace, so that in their hearts and among peoples thoughts and acts of justice and peace may prevail.
Today, let us particularly beg the intercession of the Mother of God, so much loved by the Russian people who, in these last few days, have suffered so much. While we pray for the victims of the recent painful ordeal, let us pray to the Blessed Virgin Mary so that such acts may not be repeated.
O Mary, who place the Rosary in our hands, teach us to pray it, becoming in your school genuine contemplatives and witnesses of Christ.
    © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 20 October 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. At the conclusion of this celebration, I greet cordially and gratefully the Cardinals present, my Brothers in the Episcopate, priests, religious and all the pilgrims who came to manifest their devotion to the new Blesseds.
To Italians
I greet the official delegation from Italy. Special greetings to the faithful of the Dioceses of Turin, Treviso and Padua, with their Bishops, the Capuchin Friars, the Priests and Sisters of the Family of St Vincent de Paul and the Sisters of St Francis de Sales.
To the French-speaking
2. I cordially greet the French-speaking pilgrims who came for the Beatification of Mary of the Passion, especially the Bishops and the official French delegation. As the new Blessed did, may you find in the contemplation of Christ the strength for your daily mission. I bless you with my whole heart.
To the English-speaking
I greet the official delegation from Uganda and the English-speaking visitors and pilgrims present at this Angelus prayer. May the example of those who have been beatified today serve to strengthen all of us in the service of others. With these holy men and women as our sure guides, and through the intercession of the Blessed Virgin Mary, may we walk always in the ways of light, grace and peace. Thank you very much.
3. On this World Mission Sunday we look to the new Blesseds as examples of untiring dedication to the service of proclaiming the Gospel. With great gratitude today I want to pay homage to the great multitude of missionaries - priests, men and women religious, laity - who in the front lines spend their energies in the service of Christ, at times sealing their witness even with their blood. My gratitude goes to those who collaborate with them in the Mission Works and in this way make an effective contribution to the building of the Kingdom of God in the world. I wish to assure to each one a special remembrance in prayer.
To the Blessed Virgin Mary, Star of Evangelization, I now entrust the entire missionary work of the Church.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 13 October 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. I have had the joy these days to welcome His Beatitude Teoctist, the Patriarch of the Orthodox Church of Romania. To him and to all those who accompanied him my heartfelt thanks once again for his deeply appreciated visit. It has brought back the memory of what God allowed me to experience in Bucharest in May 1999. From those meetings there arose a sincere desire for unity. "Unitate" I heard the young people of Bucharest proclaim. Last Monday I heard "Unity" proclaimed again in St Peter's Square, in my first meeting with His Beatitude, the Patriarch.
2. This thirst for full communion among Christians has received remarkable impetus since the Second Vatican Council, which dedicated to ecumenism one of its more important documents, the Decree Unitatis redintegratio.
Two days ago we observed the fortieth anniversary of the opening of that historical assembly, called for 11 October 1962, by Pope John XXIII, whom we now revere as Blessed. I had the grace of participating in that event and in my heart I hold valuable and unforgettable memories.
In his opening address, Pope John, full of hope and faith, exhorted the Council Fathers to remain faithful to Catholic tradition and to present it again in a way suitable for the new times. In a certain sense, the 11th of October forty years ago marked the solemn and universal beginning of what is called the "new evangelization".
3. The Council represented the "holy door" of that new springtime of the Church that was manifested in the Great Jubilee of the year 2000. For this reason, with the Apostolic Letter Novo Millennio ineunte I have asked the Church to take again into her hands the Conciliar documents, which "have not lost their value nor their brilliance". They must be known and assimilated as "important and normative texts of the Magisterium within the Tradition of the Church"(cf. n. 57). On the occasion of the Jubilee Day of the Lay Apostolate, I symbolically presented these documents to the new generations.
May the Virgin Mary, Mother of God and of the Church, help us to understand that in the Council we have received "a sure compass to guide us on the path of the century that is beginning" (ibid).
To the Polish-speaking
At this moment, I wish to join my countrymen in Poland spiritually, who today observe their own "Papal Day". I hope that this day may be an occasion for the common rediscovery of the religious and cultural values that constitute the spiritual heritage of our Nation. May it be a day of solidarity, above all, with the young who are in need of help so that they may obtain the education that is suitable for their gifts and their youthful aspirations.
Many thanks to those who, in many ways, and especially by means of prayer, express their kind support toward me on the occasion of my election. I entrust all of them to the protection of the Blessed Virgin Mary and I bless them from my heart.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 6 October 2002
  1. At the end of this solemn liturgical celebration, I wish to greet cordially all the pilgrims who have come from every part of the world. I direct a special greeting to the government delegation, numerous personalities and pilgrims from Italy, where the new Saint worked everywhere for the good of souls and the spread of the Gospel.
French-speaking
2. I cordially greet the French-speaking delegations and pilgrims who have come to the canonization of Josemaría Escrivá. May they find in the teaching of the new saint the spiritual elements they need to walk in the path of holiness in their daily lives. With affection I bless you.
English-speaking
I invite the members of the various delegations and all of you who have come from English-speaking countries to take to heart the lesson of the new Saint:  that Jesus Christ should be the inspiration and goal of every aspect of your daily lives. I commend you and your families to his intercession and invoke abundant blessings on your commitment and apostolate.
German-Speaking
Cordial greetings to the German-speaking pilgrims who participate in the celebration of the canonization of the priest Josemaría Escrivá de Balaguer. May his word and examples encourage you to strive for holiness. Fulfill the small things of everyday with great love for God. May the Lord grant you his grace.
Spanish-speaking
I greet all the official delegations and the numerous participants in the canonization of Josemaría Escrivá de Balaguer, who have come from Spain and South America. Accepting like Peter the invitation of Jesus to put out into the sea, be apostles in the setting of your daily life. On this path may the Virgin Mary and the intercession of the new Saint accompany you.
Portuguese-speaking
I greet the Portuguese-speaking participants. May the Saint Josemaría serve as a model of your dedication to sanctifying your work and your families. Praised be Our Lord Jesus Christ.
Polish-speaking
I cordially greet all the members of Opus Dei, those devoted to Saint Josemaría and all the pilgrims from Poland. May his intercession be for all a pledge of grace and may the charism of his life inspire you on the ways of spiritual progress. God bless you.
3. Love for Our Lady is a constant characteristic of the life of Josemaría Escrivá and is an eminent part of the legacy that he left to his spiritual sons and daughters. Let us invoke the humble Servant of the Lord so that, through the intercession of her devoted son, she may grant to all of us the grace to follow her with docility on her challenging path of evangelical perfection.
Finally, I cordially greet the Prelate and all the members of Opus Dei and I thank them for all that they do for the Church.
    © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 29 September 2002
 
Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. We are already on the threshold of the month of October, which, with the liturgical memorial of Our Lady of the Rosary, inspires us to rediscover this traditional prayer, so simple yet so profound.
The Rosary is a way of contemplating the face of Christ seeing him - we may say - with the eyes of Mary. For this reason, it is a prayer that drawing upon the core of the Gospel is in full accord with the inspiration of the Second Vatican Council and very much in keeping with the direction I gave in the Apostolic Letter Novo Millennio ineunte: the Church has to launch out "into the deep" in the new millennium beginning with the contemplation of the face of Christ.

Therefore, I wish to suggest the recitation of the Rosary to individuals, families and Christian communities. To give force to this invitation, I am preparing a document which will help to rediscover the beauty and depth of this prayer.

2. I wish once again to entrust the great cause of peace to the praying of the Rosary. We are facing an international situation that is full of tensions, at times threatening to explode. In some parts of the world, where the confrontation is harsher - I think particularly of the suffering land of Christ - we can realize that, even though they are necessary, political efforts are worth little if one remains exacerbated in his mind and no one cares to demonstrate a new disposition of heart in the hope of reviving the struggle and effort of dialogue.

Who but God alone can infuse such sentiments? It is more necessary than ever that from every part of the earth prayer for peace be made to Him. In this perspective, the Rosary turns out to be the form of prayer most needed. It builds peace because, while it appeals to the grace of God, it sows in the one praying it the seed of good from which we can expect the fruit of justice and solidarity for personal and community life.
I am thinking of nations and also of families. How much peace would flow into family relationships if the family would begin again to pray the Rosary.
John Paul II greeted the pilgrims in French, English, German, Spanish, Portuguese, Polish and Italian.
To the English-speaking
3. I extend a warm greeting to the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors, and invite you to make the month of October a time of special attention to the recitation of the Rosary, the great prayer of intercession to Mary. Upon you and your families I invoke the joy and peace of the Lord.

4. The prayer we are about to pray begins by recalling the annunciation of the Archangel Gabriel to the Virgin Mary. In fact, today is the feast of the holy Archangels Michael, Gabriel and Raphael. May these powerful ministers of God obtain for us the grace to correspond always with generous love to his will.
Dear Friends, this is the last Angelus of the vacation period. With affection, I greet once again the townsfolk of Castel Gandolfo: Goodbye until next year. Next Sunday, 6 October, God willing, we shall be in St Peter's Square.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 22 September 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. These days in Italy and in many other countries school has begun again following the summer break. It is an important time for a great multitude of children and young people.
Transform the school with a more positive relationship between teachers and students
At times it is said that the school, like the family, is "in crisis". This expression is used to refer to the widespread feeling that this institution, recognized as essentially valid, is in need of a profound transformation that will make it more responsive to the present needs of society.
However, to achieve this goal, it is not enough to modify programmes and structures. A well-functioning school depends, above all, on the constructive quality of the relation between teachers and students. The students are motivated to give the best of themselves when teachers help them to understand the meaning of what they must study, how it relates to their growth and the world that surrounds them. This is true for all schools, public and private, of all kinds and at all levels.
2. On many occasions, I have repeated that the culture is the foundation of a people's identity. The contribution that the school makes, with the family, and in a way that is subordinate to the family, continues to be indispensable for transmitting the values of the culture. The culture has become more articulated and complex but, really for this reason - when one realizes its impact - the school acquires new importance. Here lies the special responsibility of believers who work in this area.
The Holy Father then greeted the pilgrims in French, English, German, Spanish, Portuguese, Polish and again in Italian.
To the English-speaking
3. Dear English-speaking Brothers and Sisters: May your visit be a time of renewal in faith, hope and love, that you may be ever more effective witnesses to our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Upon all of you and your families, I invoke abundant divine blessings.

4. Finally, I wish to express my best wishes to all those who belong to the world of education: students, teachers, directors and collaborators. I assure each of you of my constant prayer and I entrust all of you to the maternal protection of the Blessed Virgin Mary. May no one lack the possibility of benefitting from this essential sector of formation, and may all be dedicated to making it genuinely productive of human maturity.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 15 September 2002
    Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The Feast of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross which we celebrated yesterday [Saturday] is followed by the memorial of Our Lady of Sorrows. Two liturgical celebrations that invite us to make a spiritual pilgrimage to Calvary. They encourage us to unite ourselves with the Virgin Mary in contemplating the mystery of the Cross.
Christianity has its principal symbol in the cross. Wherever the Gospel has put down roots, the cross is there to indicate the presence of Christians. In churches and homes, in hospitals and schools, in cemeteries - the cross has become better than any other, the sign of a culture that draws from the message of Christ truth and liberty, trust and hope.
In the process of secularization, that characterizes a great part of the contemporary world, it is all the more important for believers to fix their gaze on this central sign of Revelation and accept its original and genuine meaning.
2. Even today, following the teaching of the early Fathers, the Church presents the Cross to the world as "the tree of life", from which one can receive the ultimate and full meaning of every single existence and of the whole of human history.
From when Jesus made it the instrument of universal salvation, the Cross is no longer synonymous with a curse, but, on the contrary, with a blessing. For the human person, tormented by doubt and sin, it reveals that "God so loved the world that he gave his only Son, so that everyone who believes in him might not perish but have eternal life" (Jn 3,16). In a word, the cross is the supreme symbol of love.
For this reason, young Christians carry it proudly through the streets of the world, entrusting to Christ all their worries and all their expectations of freedom, justice and peace.
John Paul II greeted the pilgrims in French, English, German, Spanish, Portuguese, Polish and Italian.
To the English-speaking
3. Trusting in the loving care of Our Lady of Sorrows, whose feast we are celebrating today, I commend the English-speaking visitors and pilgrims to her maternal intercession. A special greeting goes to the people of the diocese of Cloyne, in Ireland, accompanied by their Bishop. Upon all of you, I invoke abundant divine blessings.
At the end, speaking in Italian, the Pope concluded his address with the Marian message.
4. At the foot of the Cross and perfectly united with her Son, the Virgin Mary was able to share in a singular way the depth of the pain and love of his sacrifice. No one better than she can teach us to love the cross. To Our Lady of Sorrows we entrust young people and families, nations and the whole of humanity. In a special way we invoke her for the sick and the suffering, for the innocent victims of injustice and violence, for Christians persecuted on account of their faith. May the glorious Cross of Christ be for all a pledge of hope, redemption and peace.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 8 September 2002
  1. In today's Gospel passage, Jesus says to his disciples: "If two of you agree on earth about anything for which they are to pray, it shall be granted to them by my heavenly Father" (Mt 18,19 [NAB]). These words, received in faith, open the heart to confidence. God is a merciful father, who listens to the prayers of his adopted children.
When believers pray, they move God's heart, for whom nothing is impossible. As I wrote in Novo Millennio ineunte, for this we need to be distinguished "in the art of prayer" (n. 32), so that Christian communities become "genuine schools of prayer" (n. 33).

2. Unfortunately, we experience not a few earthshaking and tragic events that sow dismay and anxiety in public opinion. Modern man seems sure of himself and yet, especially on critical occasions, he must come to terms with his powerlessness:  he feels his incapacity to intervene and, consequently, lives in uncertainty and fear. The secret for facing not only emergencies, but, day after day, fatigue, personal and social problems lies in prayer made with faith. Whoever prays is not discouraged even in the face of the most serious difficulties because he feels God at his side and finds refuge, serenity and peace in his open arms. Then, in opening himself with confidence to God, he opens himself with greater generosity to his neighbour and becomes capable of building history according to the plan of God.
Dear brothers and sisters, "may education in prayer become a key-point of all pastoral planning" (Novo Millennio ineunte, n. 34). It is very important to pray every day, personally and as a family. May prayer, and prayer together, be the daily breath of families, parishes and of every community.
John Paul II then greeted the pilgrims in French, English, German, Spanish, Portuguese, Polish and Italian. In English, he said: 
3. I am pleased to greet the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors present for this Angelus prayer. Upon you and your families, I cordially invoke the grace and peace of our Lord Jesus Christ.
4. May Mary help us to understand the great value of prayer, the intimate union of the soul with God. Today we celebrate the mystery of her Nativity, to which the Christian people have always felt great devotion. Let us ask the Blessed Virgin Mary to open our hearts to greater confidence in the Lord who in her, the humble and docile handmaid, worked great wonders.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 1 September 2002

Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. In many countries, the month of September means the return to work and school activities following the summer pause, which I hope was serene and profitable for all. Some took advantage of the summer to participate in courses of prayer and spiritual formation, programmes of work and service. Now is the time to share the experiences with family, friends, groups, communities and associations, bringing to daily life enthusiasm, serenity and joy. This is the way to be the "salt and light" of the earth, as I reminded the young people gathered in Toronto for World Youth Day.
2. From the psychological point of view, it is not easy to return to daily life. In fact, sometimes it might be difficult to return again to one's daily obligations. However, it is in our daily work ("ferialità") that God calls us to acquire that maturity of the spiritual life which consists in living the ordinary things in an extraordinary way.
Indeed, we achieve holiness by following Jesus, not by avoiding reality and its trials, but by facing them in the light and strength of his Spirit. As today's liturgy emphasizes, all of this finds its greatest enlightenment in the mystery of the Cross. Jesus asks believers to take up their own cross every day and follow him (cf. Mt 16,24), imitating him in the total gift of self to God and one's neighbour.
The Holy Father then greeted the pilgrims in French, English, German, Spanish, Portuguese and Italian.
To the English-speaking
3. I am pleased to welcome the new students of the Pontifical North American College in Rome. May your study of theology deepen your love for Christ and make you joyful and effective witnesses to the Gospel. My greetings also go to the students from the Rome campus of the University of Dallas. Upon all the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors, I cordially invoke the grace and peace of Our Lord Jesus Christ.
To the Spanish-speaking
I am happy to greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims. May the Lord grant you abundant grace and blessing so you can do his will every day of your life.
To the Portuguese-speaking
I greet the Portuguese-speaking pilgrims and among them the group of the Mission of the Conventual Franciscans of Viseu. To all of you as a pledge of abundant divine gifts, I cordially impart my Apostolic Blessing.
To Polish pilgrims
Now I wish to greet the pilgrims from Poland: from Sanok, the Franciscan Handbell Ringers; the Catholic gymnasium from Łodz and individual pilgrims.
The First of September recalls the start, the outbreak of the Second World War and all the tragic events of that war. In thought and in prayer we embrace the millions of victims of the horror of the war and all those who fought heroically for the freedom of our country. May the suffering and the sad experiences of those who survived the war contribute to the building of a lasting peace which is the right and the good of all. God bless all of you, both those who listen to me here and on Polish soil, in Kraków, everyone. "From plague, famine and war, deliver us, O Lord".

4. May the Virgin Mary teach and help us to make of our life a humble and joyful hymn of praise to God, in whose eyes one act of love is worth more than splendid undertakings. May Mary support us in our daily obligations so that, as the Apostle exhorts us today, we may not be conformed to the mentality of the world, but may be transformed by the renewal of our minds to "be able to discern the will of God" (cf. Rom 12,2).
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 25 August 2002
  1. "O the depth of the riches and wisdom and knowledge of God! For from him and through him and to him are all things. To him be glory for ever. Amen" (Rom 11,33.36).

With this hymn of praise, presented again in today's liturgy, St Paul ends the first part of his Letter to the Romans. Before the wonder of divine providence manifested in creation and in history, the human creature feels very small. At the same time, the human creature recognizes that he is the one who receives the message of love inviting him to responsibility. Human beings are appointed by God as stewards of the earth to cultivate and protect it. From this fact there comes what we might call their "ecological vocation", which in our time has become more urgent than ever.

2. Meditating on this passage by the Apostle Paul our thoughts go to the World Summit on Sustainable Development that opens tomorrow in Johannesburg, South Africa. We all hope that the many Heads of State and Government present, and the other participants, will succeed in finding effective ways for an integral human development which keeps in mind the economic, social and environmental dimensions. In a world that is increasingly interdependent, peace, justice and the safeguarding of creation must be the fruit of the common effort of all in pursuing together the common good.
The Holy Father greeted the faithful in various languages. To the French- and English-speaking pilgrims he said: 
3. I am pleased to greet you French-speaking pilgrims. Like Peter, may you always be able to recognize Christ! I wish you a blessed pilgrimage. God bless you!
I cordially greet all the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors present at this Angelus prayer. May our Lord Jesus Christ bless you and your families with joy and peace.

4. We now turn to the Blessed Virgin Mary. She takes part in the joys and sorrows, the anxieties and hopes of humanity, as happened about 50 years ago in Syracuse when an image of Our Lady, now kept in the shrine especially built for it, shed tears for several days.
In order to prepare for the 50th anniversary of that extraordinary event, from the coming 29 August until 1 September 2003, the Archdiocese of Syracuse will celebrate a special Marian Year. We willingly join the beloved community of Syracuse in prayer, convinced that the tears of the heavenly Mother are an eloquent sign of Divine Mercy, to which I again wish to entrust the Church and the whole world.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
APOSTOLIC VOYAGE TO POLAND
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Błonie, Kraków
Sunday, 18 August 2002
  Before concluding this liturgy by praying the Angelus, I wish to speak to the young people. Unfortunately it was not possible to have a special meeting with them during this visit, but I saw them everywhere I went on my pilgrimage. I know that there is a large group of members of the "Light and Life" movement present here; they spent the night in prayer at the Church of Saints Peter and Paul in All Saints Parish in order to meet the Pope at this solemn Mass. I remember that exactly thirty years ago, on 16 August, in Blyszcz, near Tylmanowa, I was able to take part in the so-called "Days of Communion". At that time I would comment that I felt personally very close to the life style proposed to the young people by the Servant of God Father Franciszek Blachnicki. And my feelings have not changed.
I thank God for this movement, which in the difficulties of past years has borne so much spiritual fruit in the hearts of young people and which today represents a stimulating environment for their spiritual growth and that of their families. Beloved members of "Oasis", when I was Bishop of Kraków I sought to show you my support by my presence; as Bishop of Rome I continue to accompany you endlessly with my prayer and my spiritual closeness. May love for the Eucharist and for the Bible always shine divine light upon the paths of your lives.
Dear young friends! Recently in Toronto, Canada, a special meeting of youth from throughout the world took place, a meeting that occurs every two years called World Youth Day. It was a marvellous event, filled with a spirit of faith; faith is the solid foundation for the enthusiasm of young people’s aspirations and plans. As I said on the shores of Lake Ontario, we have re-lived the experience of the people of Galilee, to whom Jesus entrusted the message of the Beatitudes beside the Lake Tiberias. Today I return from that experience, keeping in mind the message of Divine Mercy. Through Saint Faustina, God entrusts this message to you, so that in its light you can better understand what it means to be poor in spirit, to be merciful, to be peacemakers, to hunger and thirst for justice, and finally to suffer persecution for Jesus’ name. 
The witness of men and women who live the Beatitudes is needed in every age. It is needed today too. I ask God to grant that your lives, according to this demanding divine measure, will be an appealing witness of mercy in our day. Remember that Christ surrounds you constantly with his merciful love. May this consciousness fill you with peace and guide you on the difficult paths of daily life.
I also wish to greet in a special way the members of the "Friends of Lepers" Association of Father Jan Beyzym, who continue his effective mission of helping lepers. I urge you:  do not let your work of mercy ever cease, and may your patron sustain you.
Through Cardinal Armand Gaétan Razafindatandra, Archbishop of Atananarivo, I greet the Church in Madagascar. I greet those who have found a place at the foot of Kosciuszko hill and also in Aleje.
I cannot forget the Archdiocese of Przemysl, which rejoices today because Superior Jan Balicki has been raised to the glory of the altars. I greet Archbishop Józef, the clergy and faithful, and I ask God to grant that devotion to the new Patron will bring abundant fruits of grace into the hearts of all.

I greet the Jesuit Fathers with their Father General. Today you have a new Beatus:  Jan Beyzym. May his dedication to God and to the needy be an example for you, and may it inspire you always to undertake new tasks according to the demands of the times.

I have already remembered the "Seraphic Sisters", the Sisters of Our Lady of Mercy:  once more I greet them, expressing the hope that they grow in number and in virtue before God and men.

Finally, we must show our respect for the guests who have come from various parts of the world.
Let me then greet the pilgrims from Lithuania, Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, Uzbekistan, Slovakia, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Italy, Austria, Canada, England, France, Germany, Sweden, Switzerland, the United States and other countries. Their presence is testimony that the devotion to Divine Mercy is spreading throughout the world. And thanks be to God! I am convinced that they will carry this message to their families and to the places where they live. I pray that this will be a gift of hope and peace for all people of good will.
[I want to greet our guests in different languages.]
And now we commend our intentions to the Mother of God, the Mother of Mercy: Angelus Domini ...
After the Apostolic Blessing, the Holy Father responded to a song the young people of the Oasis were singing:
To conclude, I would like to add that this same song of the "Oasis" accompanied me 24 years ago outside of my country. I heard it all the time. It was the time of the conclave. I have not forgotten this song of the "Oasis" all these years. It was like a hidden breath of our homeland. It was my guide on the variety of paths of the Church. It was this song that often led me spiritually here, to B³onie of Kraków, to the foot of the Kosciuszko Hill. I thank you, song of the "Oasis". I thank you B³onie of Kraków for the hospitality you have shown so many times, especially today. May God reward you. I would like to add:  See you again. But this is completely in God's hands. I entrust this entirely to the mercy of God.
 
SOLEMNITY OF THE ASSUMPTION
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Thursday, 15 August 2002
   
1. The Solemnity of the Assumption in body and soul of Mary into heaven at the heart of the summer season, reminds us of what our true and ultimate dwelling place is: Heaven. As the Letter to the Hebrews says: " Here we have no lasting city, but we seek the city which is to come" (13,14). In the mystery which we contemplate today we find clearly revealed the destiny of every human creature: the victory over death, to live forever with God. Mary is the perfect woman in whom even now the divine plan is fulfilled, as a pledge of our resurrection. She is the first fruit of Divine Mercy since she was the first to share in the divine covenant sealed and fully realized in Christ who died and rose for us.
2. "Blessed is she who believed in the fulfilment of what was spoken to her by the Lord" (Lk 1,45). These words well describe Mary, the Virgin of the fiat, who with her total availability opened the doors to the Saviour of the world. Great and heroic was the obedience of her faith; it was through this faith that Mary was perfectly united to Christ, in death and glory. Looking to her strengthens our faith in what we await, and at the same time, we understand better the meaning and value of our earthly pilgrimage.
3. O Mary, Mother of hope, strong with your help we do not fear obstacles and difficulties; fatigue and sufferings do not discourage us, because you accompany us on the path of life and from heaven, you watch over all your children filling them with grace. To you we entrust the destiny of the peoples and the mission of the Church. Today especially, I want to entrust to you my pastoral journey to Poland on which, please God, I will set out tomorrow.
Dear brothers and sisters, I ask you to accompany me with your prayers.
The Holy Father greeted the pilgrims in French, English, German, Spanish, Portuguese, and Polish. He gave a special mention to those in Germany, Austria, Czech Republic and Slovakia who have been hit by severe flooding.
English-speaking pilgrims
I greet the English-speaking visitors present for this Angelus prayer, including the pilgrimage group from Malta. May Mary, from her place in heaven, guide you and your families to the glorious Kingdom of Jesus her Son.
Polish-speaking pilgrims
Today I want to greet the pilgrims gathered at Kalwaria Zebrzydowska with the Cardinals and Bishops to celebrate, in a special way on the Feast of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary, the 400th anniversary of the Shrine. I join you in spirit, hoping that - please God - very soon I will be able to join you at Kalwaria to thank God for all the graces that in the course of four centuries he has poured out on generations of the faithful. May your pilgrimage be for all a source of divine blessings.
Victims of the floods
A special remembrance to the victims of the bad weather that has hit several countries in Europe in the past few days and to all who are suffering the serious hardships caused by the floods. I assure everyone of my spiritual closeness and upon each of you I invoke the motherly protection of Our Lady.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 11 August 2002
  1. During this time of summer relaxation, when many are enjoying a deserved rest, I cannot stop thinking with great concern about the Holy Land. There, unfortunately, the almost daily episodes of reprehensible violence do not cease, taking the lives of so many of our brothers and sisters, victims of a deadly unending spiral of retaliation.
When will it be understood that the coexistence of the Israeli and Palestinian peoples cannot be brought about by arms? For it is neither attacks, nor walls that separate, nor even retaliation that will ever lead to a just solution of the continuing conflict. The Pope suffers with all those who weep because of bereavement and destruction; above all he is close to the numerous innocent victims who pay the price of this violence. He wishes to repeat to everyone, regardless of the ethnic group to which they belong, that there is no justification for those who kill defenceless civilians indiscriminately.
2. From 1967 till today, unspeakable sufferings have followed one upon another in a frightening manner: the suffering of the Palestinians, driven out of their land and forced, in recent times, into a state of permanent siege, becoming as it were the object of a collective punishment; the suffering of the Israeli population, who live in the daily terror of being targets of anonymous assailants.
To this we must add the violation of a fundamental right, that of freedom of worship. In effect, because of a strict curfew, believers no longer have access to their places of worship on the day of weekly prayer.
I think of you, beloved Christians: although not involved in terrorist activity and yet sharing the great affliction of your fellow citizens, you are now tempted to leave the Holy Land. The Pope and the whole Church are with you, and they renew their sentiments of profound solidarity and spiritual closeness.
3. Faced with this humanitarian tragedy, which does not seem to show any signs of hope, no one can remain indifferent. That is why, once again, I appeal to the Israeli and Palestinian political leadership to set out anew on the path of sincere negotiation. I ask the international community to work with greater resolve in being present in the area, offering its mediation in order to create the conditions for a fruitful dialogue that will speed the process towards peace. I call on Christians of every part of the world to join in my fervent and trusting prayer. Mary, Queen of Peace, grant that the cries of those who suffer and die in the Holy Land will finally be heard.
4. Je salue les pèlerins de langue française. Soyez des hommes et des femmes de foi, accueillants à l’amour du Seigneur et prêts à témoigner de lui! Avec la Bénédiction apostolique.
I cordially greet the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors. Upon you and your families I invoke God’s blessings of joy and peace.
Ich grüße euch herzlich, liebe deutschsprachige Pilger und Besucher, und wünsche Euch einen schönen Sonntag.
Saludo a los peregrinos de lengua española. Llevad a vuestros hogares el afecto del Papa, que os bendice de todo corazón.
Rezai pela Paz no mundo ao Deus de Misericórdia. Com a minha Bênção, extensiva às vossas famílias e enfermos.
Saluto i pellegrini italiani qui presenti, in particolare le Suore Ancelle Francescane del Buon Pastore, che celebrano in questi giorni il Capitolo Generale. A tutti auguro ogni desiderato bene spirituale e una serena domenica.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 4 August 2002
  1. I have just returned from my journey to Canada, Guatemala and Mexico, and I thank divine Providence for granting me the grace to fulfil this further apostolic commitment. I thank all those, who in various ways contributed to it and who accompanied my progress with their fervent prayers.

In my catechesis next Wednesday I will reflect on my stops in Guatemala and Mexico, while today I desire to return in thought to Toronto. The 17th World Youth Day brought together from every continent hundreds of thousands of young men and women who were received with warm friendliness by the people of Canada, a country characterized by a rich and varied humanism.

2. On the banks of Lake Ontario young people relived the experience of the people of Galilee on the shores of the Lake of Tiberias when, having called to himself the crowds, Jesus entrusted to them the splendid and demanding "proclamation" of the Beatitudes. The young people gathered in Toronto realized that in Jesus' words they can find the response to the expectation of joy and hope that burns in their hearts. This answer is convincing, because Jesus did not restrict himself to proclaiming the Beatitudes, but lived them in the first person, even to the supreme gift of himself.
Jesus was poor, meek, merciful and pure in heart. He sought justice, comforted the afflicted and built peace, paying the price for doing so with the sacrifice of himself on the Cross.
This is why at the heart of every meeting there was the Cross. It is the Cross that accompanies the "people of the Beatitudes", the young people, on their pilgrimage on the highways of the world.

3. "Blessed are you!". The Beatitudes are the magna charta of those who want to introduce into the world a new civilization. The young people understood this and set out from Canada, determined to place their trust in Christ, because they know that he "has the words of eternal life" (cf. Jn 6,68). A world that does not refer to Christ - this is Toronto's message - is a world that sooner or later ends by being against human beings. The history of the recent past is the proof. One does not reject God without finding oneself rejecting the human person.
This is why the young people who came together from more than 170 countries accepted Christ's invitation to be "the salt of the earth and the light of the world" (Mt 5,13-14). They have to be above all salt and light and later they can act as salt and light. This was the challenge of the 17th World Youth Day. The young people accepted it and have now returned to their countries to be architects of the new "civilization of love".
With this commitment, after their intense experience in Canada, they have set out anew towards the next stop which will be Cologne, Germany, in 2005.
May Mary, Mother of the Church accompany the young people of the whole world on this spiritual and ecclesial journey.
French-speaking pilgrims
4. Dear French-speaking pilgrims who have gathered for the prayer of the Angelus, I greet you cordially. In the light of the unforgettable World Youth Day of Toronto, may you be ever more salt of the earth and light of the world! With my Apostolic Blessing.
English-speaking
I am pleased to greet the English-speaking visitors who have come to pray the Angelus with us today. Having recently returned from the 17th World Youth Day in Toronto, my thoughts and prayers go in a special way to young people: may the Lord continue to bless them and strengthen them, so that they may truly be salt of the earth and light of the world! To everyone, a happy and restful summer!
German-speaking
I offer a heartfelt greeting to the German-speaking pilgrims. I greet in particular the members and friends of the Men's Choir of Solymár in Hungary. I wish you all happy and restful holidays!
Spanish-speaking
I greet with affection the Spanish-speaking pilgrims. I would like to share with all of you the beautiful experience I had on my visit to Toronto, Guatemala and Mexico. I cordially bless you all.
Portuguese-speaking
I now greet the Portuguese-speaking pilgrims. I thank them for their presence and for joining in the prayer that my pastoral service for the good of humanity may be ever more effective. God bless you.
Italians
Lastly, a cordial greeting to the Italian pilgrims, and especially to the "Vincenzo Cecere" band from Santo Stefano di Camastra, Messina.
I also greet the delegation from the municipality of Castel Gandolfo, led by the Mayor, which came to offer me the customary gift of peaches as a pleasant complement to the traditional celebration last Sunday. Thank you, dear friends, for your presence and for your traditional gift of baskets of peaches!

5. May the Blessed Virgin Mary, whom we invoke with the prayer of the Angelus Domini, help us to respond ever more faithfully to the call to holiness that Christ directs to every Christian.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
APOSTOLIC VISIT TO TORONTO,
TO CIUDAD DE GUATEMALA AND TO CIUDAD DE MÉXICO
JOHN PAUL II
17th WORLD YOUTH DAY
ANGELUS
Toronto, Downsview Park, Sunday July 28, 2002
  We conclude this splendid celebration of the Eucharist with the Angelus prayer to Mary, Mother of the Redeemer.
To her I entrust the fruits of this World Youth Day, that in time, with her help, they may flourish. This World Youth Day must mark a reawakening of pastoral attention to the young in Canada. May the enthusiasm of this moment be the spark that is needed to launch a new era of powerful witness to the Gospel!
I wish formally to announce that the next World Youth Day will take place in 2005, in Cologne, Germany.
In the great Cathedral in Cologne are honoured the relics of the Magi, the Wise Men from the East who followed the star which led them to Christ. As pilgrims, your spiritual journey to Cologne starts today. Christ awaits you there for the Twentieth World Youth Day!
May the Virgin Mary, our Mother on our pilgrimage of faith, be with you on the way.
Angelus Domini nuntiavit Mariae...
Post Angelus:
English
I wish to thank everyone who has helped to make the World Youth Day such a success: the citizens of Toronto, the volunteers, the police, the fire-department, the Mayor and the authorities at every level of the Canadian government.
My heartfelt greeting goes to the other Christian Churches and Communities represented here, as well as to the followers of other religious traditions.
My wish for all of you who are here is that the commitments you have made during these days of faith and celebration will bring forth abundant fruits of dedication and witness. May you always treasure the memory of Toronto!
French
I extend a special word of gratitude to Cardinal Ambrozic, Archbishop of Toronto, to the Canadian Bishops Conference and to the Organizing Committee. My thanks also go to the Pontifical Council for the Laity in the person of the President, Cardinal James Francis Stafford.
I greet the Cardinals and Bishops who have come from other parts of the world; and all the priests, deacons and religious who shared these days with the young people.
As we prepare to return home, I say, in the words of Saint Augustine: "We have been happy together in the light we have shared. We have really enjoyed being together. We have really rejoiced. But as we leave one another, let us not leave Him" (In Io.ev. tr., 35,9).
Spanish
Thanks to all the Spanish-speaking young people. Do not be afraid to respond generously to the Lord’s calling. Let your faith shine before the world. Let your actions show your commitment to the saving message of the Gospel!
Portuguese
Dear Portuguese-speaking young people: The World Youth Day does not end here; it will continue in your lives of fidelity to Christ. Be salt! Be light for the world around you!
Italian
Carissimi Giovani Italiani: Keep alive the gift of faith which has sustained you in these days. The Church needs your dedication. Arrivederci a Roma!
German
Dear German-speaking friends: You in a special way have to keep alive the spirit of the World Youth Day, in order to prepare for Cologne in 2005. Work to build a civilization of love and justice. Let your light lead many others to Christ’s kingdom of holiness, truth and justice.
Polish
My thoughts turn to our Polish homeland, which I will soon visit again. Never lose sight of your Christian heritage. It is there that you will find the wisdom and courage you need to meet the great moral and ethical challenges of our times. I entrust you all to the protection of Our Lady of Jasna Góra.
 
APOSTOLIC VISIT TO TORONTO,
TO CIUDAD DE GUATEMALA AND TO CIUDAD DE MÉXICO
JOHN PAUL II
17th WORLD YOUTH DAY
ANGELUS
Morrow Park, Chapel, Saturday July 27, 2002
  Dear Sisters,
I am most grateful for the hospitality you have given me on the occasion of my visit to Toronto for the Seventeenth World Youth Day. I know how much the Sisters of Saint Joseph, together with so many other religious communities, have done to prepare this important event and to welcome young people from around the world. To each and all, my warmest thanks.
Your Congregation has just celebrated its hundred and fiftieth anniversary. I join you in thanking the Lord who has worked wonders through the dedication, sacrifice and humble and hidden service of countless Sisters of Saint Joseph. I ask him to continue to assist you with his grace and the gift of his Spirit in offering all that you are and all that you will become, in never-failing willingness to be sent, as Jesus was, to serve.
May Mary, spouse of Saint Joseph, be your mother and your teacher of life and holiness.
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 21 July 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The memory of the World Youth Day during the Great Jubilee that took place in Rome at Tor Vergata in August 2000 is still very much alive in my heart. On those unforgettable days, the young believers kindled for everyone a fire of hope. They are set to meet in Toronto in a few days to observe the 17th World Youth Day so that they can continue their common pilgrimage of brotherhood over the face of the globe.
The tragic events of 11 September and the conflict in the Holy Land have cast over the world a dark shadow. Jesus urges his disciples not to be afraid and repeats to them: "You are the salt of the earth ... You are the light of the world" (Mt 5,13-14). The young Christians who will meet in Toronto are ready to reply to Christ: Here we are! At your word, without fear, we will throw out the nets of the Gospel (cf. Lk 5,5).

2. Please God, I will be setting out on Tuesday to meet the young men and women from every corner of the earth who will converge on Toronto: I go to pray with them, to rejoice and with them to have an enriching experience of faith.
In a special way, I want to mention their peers who are unable to be present in person and will follow the event in the news media. We will all be united in prayer, invoking the one Spirit who makes Christians one Body in Christ.
Toronto in Canada, the metropolis with a cosmopolitan vocation, is ready to become for a week the world capital of youth, the future and the hope of the Church and of humanity! Even now I greet and thank those who are working to welcome the young pilgrims who will arrive with the Bishops, priests and religious who have accompanied them: Thank you very much! Merci beaucoup!
3. Dear French-speaking pilgrims, I cordially greet you and invite you to pray for the young people who are gathering in Canada for World Youth Day. May this important time help them to be the salt of the earth and the light of the world. With my Apostolic Blessing.
I extend a special welcome to the English-speaking visitors, hoping that the summer season will bring time for reflection and for reading the Scriptures. God bless you and your families!
I warmly greet the pilgrims from the German-speaking countries. I pray that you will become the "salt of the earth", on the basis of your vocation as Christians. I am especially looking forward to meeting with all the young people in Toronto!
I greet with affection the Spanish-speaking pilgrims, especially the members of "La Obra de la Iglesia" (Work of the Church). I invite you all to sow peace and hope, in this way becoming "salt of the earth", spiritually united with the young people from all over the world whom I will meet during the forthcoming Youth Day in Toronto.
I also greet the Portuguese-speaking pilgrims and I ask them all for the benefit of their prayer and sacrifice, so that my pastoral visit to the Americas may bear great fruit. God bless you all!
I greet with affection the Italian-speaking pilgrims, especially the participants in the international course for seminary formation directors, organized by the Pontifical Athenaeum Regina Apostolorum of the Legionaries of Christ, and the group of sisters and novices of the Carmelites of the Sacred Heart of Jesus in Rocca di Papa.
4. I entrust everyone to the Blessed Virgin Mary, asking her to obtain for all those taking part in the World Youth Day a great outpouring of graces and blessings. Today I ask you to pray for this special intention as we pray the Angelus.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 14 July 2002
    1. For many people the holiday period begins in the month of July. I warmly wish everyone on vacation a peaceful time of relaxation that physically and mentally refreshes them. At the same time, I cannot but recall with affection all those who, instead, do not have the chance to go away. I am thinking especially of the people in prison, in hospital, and who are left alone at home. I would like to assure them of my spiritual closeness as I hope they will not lack the help they need from friends. I also express my deep appreciation of those who with a genuine human and Christian spirit dedicate themselves to helping the needy, the sick and all who are in difficulty.

2. In this regard, I want to recall that today is the liturgical memorial of St Camillus de Lellis, Patron of the sick and of all who care for them. When he was a young soldier, Providence took advantage of a wound in one of his feet to give him an experience of hospital. He was admitted to San Giacomo in Rome. Years later, that wound led him back to the very same hospital where he set about treating the sick, especially those who were the most seriously ill and the most repulsive, in whom he saw and served Jesus.

Realizing what God wanted of him, he dedicated himself entirely to Him and to fulfil this important service he founded a new Order: the Order of the Servants, who were later known as the "Camillians". On their chest they wear a large red cross, stitched to their habit, to remind themselves and everyone that Christ is the divine Doctor, the true Saviour of humanity.

3. I offer my cordial greeting to the French-speaking pilgrims who have come to recite the Angelus. I ask the Holy Spirit to open your hearts, so that the Word of God may bear fruit in your lives as baptized persons.
Upon the English-speaking visitors I invoke an abundance of divine blessings, and wish you all a very pleasant and spiritually fruitful holiday.
I warmly greet the German-speaking pilgrims. May the Lord bless you all and may God's mercy accompany you throughout life, and in leisure time!
I cordially greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims. May this summer season also be a favourable opportunity to experience God's presence in our lives.
Dear Portuguese-speaking pilgrims, as I offer you a cordial greeting, I ask you to pray that my forthcoming Apostolic Journey will bear abundant fruits in the Continent of Hope, especially among young people.
I greet the pilgrims who have come from Poland: from Slupsk - the Parish of St Maximilian Mary Kolbe, from Skawina, near Kraków - a group of scouts from Czchów and from Gorlice - the teachers, young people and children from the summer camps in Kalisz, Poznan, and Stettin, and the "Belcanto" Choir from Gdansk. The sun has come out after the shower. May God bless and favour you all and your families.
I affectionately greet the Italian-speaking pilgrims, especially the community of the International Novitiate of the Daughters of Mary Help of Christians, and assure them a special prayer for the 13 novices who will be making their profession this 5 August.
4. Let us entrust all our intentions to Mary. Let us ask her to watch over the World Youth Day, now at hand, so that it may be an experience rich in faith and Christian commitment for the young people who will be meeting one another in Toronto.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 7 July 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Maria Goretti died 100 years ago, on 6 July 1902. She had been mortally injured the day before by the blind violence of her attacker. My Venerable Predecessor, the Servant of God Pius XII, canonized her in 1950, holding her up to everyone as a model of courageous fidelity to the Christian vocation, even to the supreme sacrifice of life.

I wanted to recall this important event with a special Message addressed to the Bishop of Albano, stressing the timeliness of this martyr of purity, whom I hope adolescents and young people will get to know better.
St Maria Goretti is an example for the new generations who are threatened by a non-commital attitude that finds it difficult to understand the importance of the values which admit of no compromise.
2. Although she was poor and deprived of a school education, Maria, who was not yet 12 years old had a strong and mature personality, shaped by the religious instruction she had received in the family. This made her capable not only of defending herself with heroic chastity, but even of forgiving her murderer.
Her martyrdom reminds us that the human being is not fulfilled by following the impulses of pleasure but by living life with love and responsibility.
I well know, dear young people, how sensitive you are to these ideals. As I look forward to meeting you in Toronto in two weeks time, I would like to repeat to you today: do not let the consumer culture and pleasure numb your conscience! Be alert and vigilant "watchmen", be the real champions of a new humanity.

3. Let us now address Our Lady, whose name was given to St Maria Goretti. May the purest of human creatures help the men and women of our time, and especially young people, to rediscover the value of chastity and to live interpersonal relations in reciprocal respect and sincere love.
    © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 30 June 2002
  1. Yesterday we celebrated the feast of the holy Apostles Peter and Paul whom the Church of Rome venerates as her principal patrons. On this special occasion, as the Successor of Peter, I realized the profound solidarity of the entire ecclesial community. The words of the Book of the Acts of the Apostles came to mind:  "Earnest prayer for him [Peter] was made to God by the church" (Acts 12,5). Yes, I have felt around me the intense prayer of the whole Church, and for this today I wish to express to all my cordial thanks.

2. In effect, every day I have the experience that my ministry is supported by the unceasing prayer of the People of God: of so many persons unknown to me, but close to my heart, who offer to the Lord their prayers and sacrifices according to the intentions of the Holy Father. In the moments of greater difficulty and suffering, this spiritual force is a valid help and intimate comfort.
I always need your prayer, dear faithful of Rome and of the whole world. In fact, without it, how could I respond to the word of the Lord, who commands Simon Peter, "Duc in altum", "Put out into the deep" (Lk 5,4)?
3. Peter and Paul, after overcoming so many hardships, even mortal afflictions, with the help of God brought to completion their apostolic mission in this our City where so many items evoke their memory.
Encouraged by their witness, let us renew our pledge to remain united in prayer, with one heart and one mind. Together with us, as in the first community of Jerusalem, let us invoke the Blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of the Lord and of every Christian. To her as the model of the Church at prayer, let us turn with filial confidence.
* * *
After the Angelus, the Pope prayed for peace.
Today we conclude the month of June, dedicated to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. May his immense love be the source of peace for everyone and for the entire world.
    © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
SOLEMNITY OF THE HOLY APOSTLES PETER AND PAUL
JOHN PAUL II 

ANGELUS
Saturday, 29 June 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today we celebrate the solemnity of the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, "the columns and foundation of the City of God", who "united in their martyrdom sealed with their blood the proclamation of the Gospel" (Liturgy of the Hours). Rome especially exults because she is honoured to have them as her principal patrons.
I address my cordial greeting to all the pilgrims who have come for this happy occasion, and I invite them to participate in the Mass that, God willing, this evening at six o'clock I will preside over in St Peter's Square.

2. On this important day I think especially of you, faithful of the Diocese of Rome, and of so many living in our city. While I offer my best wishes to all who have the name of Peter and Paul, for each one I ask from their heavenly patrons peace and Christian prosperity.
Rome, be faithful to your Christian dignity. The light of the Gospel does not take anything away from the various components of your glorious history. Rather, it leads them all to their highest meaning:  to prepare a road for Christ, salvation of mankind. May the holy Apostles Peter and Paul always support you; may the blessed Virgin Mary, Salvation of the Roman People, to whom we now turn with loving confidence, accompany you.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 23 June 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The month of June is set aside in a special way for devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. To celebrate the Heart of Christ means to go to the inner centre of the Person of the Saviour, the centre which the Bible identifies as his Heart, the seat of the love that has redeemed the world.

If the human heart is really an unfathomable mystery known only to God, how much more sublime is the Heart of Jesus in whom the very life of the Word is pulsating. Echoing the Scriptures, as the beautiful Litany of the Sacred Heart suggests that we find in the Heart of Jesus all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge and the whole fullness of divinity.
To save man, the victim of his own disobedience, God wanted to give him a "new heart" that would be faithful to his loving will (cf. Jer 31,33; Ez 36,26; Ps 50,[51]12). This heart is the Heart of Jesus, the Holy Spirit's masterpiece, which began to beat in Mary's virginal womb and was pierced by the spear as Jesus hung on the Cross, becoming for all an inexhaustible source of eternal life. That Heart is now a pledge of hope for every man and woman.

2. How necessary for humanity today is the message that flows from contemplation of the Heart of Christ! Indeed, where else, but in that source, can humanity find the reserves of gentleness and forgiveness so needed to heal the conflicts that bloody them?
Today in a special way I want to entrust to the merciful Heart of Jesus all who live in the Holy Land: Jews, Christians and Muslims. That Heart, deeply scorned, never nursed sentiments of hatred or revenge, but asked forgiveness for his executioners; that Heart points to the only way out of the spiral of violence:  the way of pacification of souls, reciprocal understanding and reconciliation.
3. Beside the merciful Heart of Christ, we venerate the Immaculate Heart of the Blessed Virgin Mary, Mediatrix of grace and of salvation.
Let us now turn to her confidently to implore mercy and peace for the Church and for the whole world.
After the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the visitors and then prayed for the victims of the terrible earthquake in Iran and the survivors and asked for solidarity for the survivors.
I also greet the American students of the Southeastern Louisiana University and of the University of Kentucky.
We have received news of a violent earthquake in the Qazvin region in north-west Iran that caused numerous deaths, injuries to many and enormous damage. I raise fervent prayers to the Lord for the victims, for their families, and for all who are suffering the tragic consequences of this earthquake. I encourage the work of the rescuers and I hope for a rapid and generous response of international solidarity to address this serious situation.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
CANONIZATION OF ST PIO OF PIETRELCINA
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 16 June 2002
  At the end of this solemn celebration, I want to greet and thank the Cardinals, Archbishops and Bishops present, the Minister General of the Capuchins and all Padre Pio's confreres.
I also want to thank the official Delegation of the Italian Government led by Vice Premier and other Italian civil and military authorities.

I want to thank in a special way all the pilgrims gathered in this square and in the neighbouring streets, I must say with courage, especially those who have faced the sacrifice of having had to stand for a long time in this heat. I also greet the faithful gathered in prayer at San Giovanni Rotondo and all who are following the rite on television. As I urge each one to walk in the footsteps of St Pio of Pietrelcina, I am pleased to announce that his liturgical commemoration will be inserted in the Roman Calendar to be observed as an obligatory memorial on 23 September, the day of his birth in heaven.
* * *
The Holy Father greeted in French, English, Spanish, Portuguese and Polish the pilgrims who came for the canonization of Padre Pio and were waving their national flags in reply to the Pope's greeting.
I greet you cordially, dear French-speaking pilgrims who have come for the canonization of Padre Pio. After the example of the new saint, may you love Christ untiringly, in fidelity to the Church. I wholeheartedly bless you all.
I am pleased to greet the English-speaking pilgrims present at today's celebration. Through the intercession of Padre Pio may you grow in loving union with the Crucified Lord and in joyful witness to the mystery of his redemptive grace, everywhere present in the world.
I greet with affection the Spanish-speaking pilgrims and encourage them to progress in Christian life, helped on their way by the rich spiritual message of the new saint, Padre Pio. I cordially bless you all.
Dear pilgrims who have come from the various Portuguese-speaking countries. I greet you all. May you grow in the love of Christ and of his Cross. May St Pio of Pietrelcina obtain this grace, whose protection we invoke upon you with our Blessing.
"May Mary rest her motherly hand on your head". The wish that Padre Pio once addressed to one of his spiritual daughters, he addresses to you today. Let us entrust to the motherly intercession of Our Lady and to St Pio of Pietrelcina the journey of holiness of the whole Church at the beginning of the new millennium.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 9 June 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. This morning, in the famous Byzantine Basilica of St Apollinaris in Classe, witness of the time when the Church of the East and West lived in full communion, His Holiness, the Ecumenical Patriarch, Bartholomew I, celebrated a solemn liturgy. I send him my fraternal greetings.

Tomorrow, thanks to a special video link with Venice, I will be able to sign with him a joint "Declaration" for the safeguard of creation. This event, taking place a few months after the Day of Prayer for Peace celebrated in Assisi when the Ecumenical Patriarch was at my side, is another example of that sharing of intentions which is a prelude to a renewed and full communion. Ravenna and Venice challenge us with their history and encourage us to continue on our way towards full unity between the Christian East and West.

2. The World Food Summit opens in Rome tomorrow. Many heads of state and government from all over the world will gather at the headquarters of the Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO).
Millions of people who suffer daily from hunger and malnutrition expect from this meeting a confirmation of the commitments made in this respect in 1996.
May God bless the meeting and enlighten the national leaders, so that they may be able to express the legitimate aspirations of the peoples and give new drive to the international community's struggle against hunger.
3. Let us entrust both these events to the maternal protection of the Blessed Virgin Mary.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father appealed for help for Angola to overcome its tragic moment of crisis.
My thoughts go today to the beloved people of Angola, who after the sufferings of a long and bloody civil war, find themselves facing a dramatic humanitarian crisis because of the lack of food and of the most basic medical care, and the constant danger of anti-personnel mines scattered over the whole territory.
Let us pray that the Lord will enlighten all those who can contribute to overcoming this tragedy, and that he will move them to act to make the country's resources benefit all its citizens and be a help for the whole of Africa.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Solemnity of Corpus Christi
Sunday, 2 June 2002
    Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today in Italy and in some other countries the Solemnity of Corpus Christi is being celebrated. The Christian community gathers round the Eucharist and in it adores its most precious treasure:  Christ really present under the appearances of bread and wine.

The whole People of God comes out of the churches and carries the Blessed Sacrament through the streets and squares of the city. The Risen Christ walks the highways of humanity and continues to offer his "flesh" to human beings as the true "Bread of Life" (cf. Jn 6,48.51). Just as was the case 2,000 years ago, "this is a hard saying" (Jn 6,60) for human intelligence which is overwhelmed by the mystery.

To explore the fascinating depths of Christ's presence under the "signs" of the bread and the wine, faith is necessary, or rather faith animated by love. Only those who believe and love can understand something of this ineffable mystery through which God draws close to our littleness, seeks to save our weakness, and reveals himself for what he is: infinite, saving love.

2. For this reason the Eucharist is the beating heart of the community. From the very outset, ever since the primitive community of Jerusalem, Christians have gathered on the Lord's Day to renew at Mass the memorial of Christ's Death and Resurrection. "Sunday" is the day of rest and praise, but without the Eucharist it loses its real meaning. Therefore, in the Apostolic Letter Novo Millennio ineunte, I again proposed as a primary pastoral commitment the recovery of the value of Sunday and, of the Eucharistic celebration on the day: "it is a fundamental duty, to be fulfilled not just in order to observe a precept but as something felt as essential to a truly informed and consistent Christian life" (n. 36).

3. In adoring the Eucharist we can only think with gratitude of the Virgin Mary. The famous Eucharistic hymn that we often sing suggests this:  "Ave verum corpus / natum de Maria Virgine" (Hail true Body, born of the Virgin Mary). Today, let us ask the Mother of the Lord to obtain that everyone may taste the sweetness of communion with Jesus and, thanks to the Bread of eternal life, receive a share in his mystery of salvation and holiness.
After leading the prayer of the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims in Italian and Spanish. Here is a translation of his Italian remarks.
I affectionately greet Italians today and express my best wishes to them for today's national holiday. May God grant Italy peace and prosperity!
I also greet with affection the group of Ukrainians of the Greek-Catholic communities of Naples and Rome, whom I cordially bless, together with their family members in Ukraine. Dear friends, may faith always sustain you in every day life.
In greeting the Italian-speaking pilgrims present, I recall that the month of June is traditionally dedicated to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. May each one draw from this inexhaustible source of grace constant help to progress in love and in generous service to neighbour.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
APOSTOLIC VISIT OF HIS HOLINESS POPE JOHN PAUL II
TO AZERBAIJAN AND BULGARIA

ANGELUS

Plovdiv - Central Square
Sunday 26 May 2002
    Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. At the conclusion of our celebration, we turn to the Mother of the Lord, the All-Holy, present in our midst in the beloved figure of the Holy Icon of Bakovo.
Together with you I make a spiritual pilgrimage to that Monastery and to the other Shrines dedicated to Mary throughout your land, and I repeat the greeting of the Angel: "Hail, full of grace!" (Lk 1:28).
2. The humble handmaid of the Father, the faithful bride of the Spirit, the most pure Mother of the Son made man, Mary shines forth before us as a model of Christian life. At her school we learn silence, listening and service, the fundamental marks of the life of a disciple.
Today too, in our restless and often confused world, silence helps us to make space for the word which saves, listening teaches us attention and tenderness, while free and generous service enlivens fraternal and community life.
3. By her powerful intercession, may the Virgin Mary help you daily to discover anew your dignity as children of God. May she obtain for you a spirit of readiness to carry out the will of the Father and to receive the gifts of the Spirit. May she keep within you a pure and generous heart capable of openness to the needs of our brothers and sisters.
I beseech her, Mother of immense charity, the precious gift of Christ Crucified, to pray for you and your families, so that your faith may remain complete, your hope firm, and your charity convincing and effective.
May Mary watch over the Christian people of Bulgaria, that they may be able to follow her Son Jesus with courage and commitment, and bear witness to him before the world by the integrity of their lives and their works!
After the Angelus, the Pope greeted the faithful in French, Romanian, Serbian, Croatian, Czech and Polish.
I greet with affection the Augustinians of the Assumption, who have gathered here from different countries to celebrate the wonders the Lord worked in the lives of their martyred confreres, Kamen, Pavel and Josaphat, today proclaimed blessed.
Faithful to the motto of your founder, Fr Emmanuel d'Alzon, "Your kingdom come!", be fearless and generous in your mission of proclaiming the Good News of salvation. I cordially bless you, without forgetting the women religious of the Congregations of the Assumption family, and all those who have come with you.
I greet with affection the Romanian-speaking bishops and faithful. Dear friends, I always have vivid memories of my visit to your beloved land and of the warm welcome you gave me. They were three days of intense communion.
To everyone I say: keep your eyes fixed on Christ. He is calling you to be courageous witnesses of his Gospel. I cordially bless you all!
I extend my greeting and my blessing to all the Serbian faithful. May Christ our Lord always light up your life with the light of the Gospel.
I cordially address the Croatian pilgrims present here. May the Christian vocation to holiness be a constant inspiration for your life and work.
I also cordially greet the Czech pilgrims who are here, and accompany them with my blessing.
I warmly greet my fellow citizens present here whose historical destiny has united them in a lasting way with Bulgaria, dear to Polish hearts. I ask God that in keeping intact the patrimony of faith of your ancestors and your own traditions, you may always be ready to collaborate actively with the ethnic groups and the religions that exist in this country. In prayer I entrust you all to the special protection of the Mother of God. God bless you!
At the end the Pope added in Bulgarian a word of thanks to the people of Bulgaria.
I thank you for your warm hospitality. May God bless you. Thank you.
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CAELI
Solemnity of Pentecost
Sunday, 19 May 2002
  1. At the conclusion of this solemn celebration, I cordially greet the pilgrims, particularly, those who have come from Piedmont, Calabria and Liguria who, with their Pastors and the Civil Authorities, have come to honour the new saints. These shining witnesses of the Gospel, to whom the Church calls attention today, invite us to turn our gaze towards Our Lady. They always had recourse to her in their lives.
2. I wish to hail the Spanish pilgrims participating in the canonization of St Alphonsus of Orozco with the other new Saints. I greet the Cardinals, Bishops and Civil Authorities, the priests and faithful, and in a special way, the members of the great family of St Augustine, enriched today with a new Saint. As he did, may you always enjoy the protection of Mary Mother of God and our Mother.
3. I warmly greet the pilgrims from Brazil, Pastors and faithful who came to assist at the canonization of St Pauline of the Suffering Heart of Jesus. I greet in a special way the President of the Republic and the other civil authorities who assisted at this celebration. I hope that the life of Mother Pauline can continue to serve as a model of holiness for the Little Sisters of the Immaculate Conception so that Our Lord can be known, loved and adored by all in the whole world.
4. Yesterday in Italy the Global March Against Child Labour and the association Mani Tese (Hands Outstretched) observed a day dedicated to sensitizing public opinion to the serious problem of the exploitation of child labour. May this initiative be a favourable occasion for seeking effective ways to resolve this intolerable phenomenon.
I greet the young people gathered at San Giovanni Rotondo to prepare for the canonization of Padre Pio. Dear young people, walk with courage on the path of holiness.

I want to express my thanks for the good wishes that Cardinal Bernardin Gantin, Dean of the Sacred College, expressed in the name of all. In particular, I am comforted by the pledge of special prayers for me and for my carrying out of the Petrine service, entrusted to me by the Lord. In this perspective, I invite you to join me now in invoking the Blessed Virgin Mary, to whom we address in song the antiphon Regina Caeli.
    © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CAELI
Solemnity of the Ascension of the Lord
Sunday, 12 May 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. In many countries, including Italy, the Solemnity of Christ's Ascension has been moved back to Sunday. With this feast we remember that after his Resurrection, Jesus presented himself alive to the disciples for 40 days (Acts 1,3), at the end of which, having led them to the Mount of Olives, "he was lifted up before their eyes and a cloud took him from their sight" (Acts 1,9). Risen and ascended into heaven, our Redeemer is the anchor of salvation and support for believers in their daily dedication to serve truth, peace, justice and freedom. In ascending to heaven, he reopens for us the way to our blessed homeland, not to alienate us from history but to give the greatest hope to our journey.

2. Indeed, every day we have to deal with the realities of this world. The World Day of Social Communications that we celebrate today reminds us of this fact.
The most recent breakthroughs in communications and information have placed the Church before unheard-of possibilities for evangelization. Keeping this fact in mind, I thought this year the relevant theme to propose should be: "Internet:  a New Forum for Proposing the Gospel".
With realism and confidence we must deal with this modern and ever denser network of communcations, convinced that if used competently and with a sense of responsibility, it can offer valid opportunities for the spread of the Gospel message.
So do not be afraid to "put out into the deep" into the vast ocean of information technology. By using it we can make the Good News reach the hearts of the men and women of the new millennium.

3. We must never forget that the secret of every apostolic action is above all prayer. Indeed, given to intense prayer after the Ascension, the disciples lived in the Upper Room as they awaited the Holy Spirit promised by Christ. In their midst was Mary, the Mother of Jesus (Acts 1,14). As we prepare to celebrate the solemn Feast of Pentecost next Sunday, with Mary let us call upon the Holy Spirit promised by Christ so that he may imbue Christians with fresh missionary zeal and guide humanity's steps on the paths of solidarity and peace.
After the Regina Caeli, the Pope gave thanks to all those who worked for the liberation of the Basilica of the Nativity.
We have all heard with great relief that the Basilica of the Nativity in Bethlehem has been restored to God and to the faithful. I cordially thank all who helped to give back to the holy place its true religious identity. I send a particular greeting to the communities of the Franciscans, Greeks and Armenian Orthodox who with considerable sacrifices remained as faithful custodians of the shrine.
To the people of Bethlehem and the surrounding region goes my heartfelt encouragement to resume their journey with faith and hope in God, who in their land became close to man.
My Special Envoy, Cardinal Roger Etchegaray, is spokesmen in Bethlehem for my sentiments. The universal message of Bethlehem is love, justice, reconciliation and peace. On these foundations a future respectful of the rights of the Israeli and Palestinian peoples can be built in mutual confidence.
    © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
PASTORAL VISIT TO THE DIOCESE OF ISCHIA
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CAELI
Sunday, 5 May 2002
    Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. At the end of this solemn Eucharistic celebration, we turn our gaze to Mary, the All Beautiful One, the creature through whom God came to meet humanity in the most sublime form. Mary is the Ark of the Covenant in which heaven and earth come together: human nature and divine nature are united in the Person of the Son of God. In this splendid island of yours, the gift and sign of the beauty of God, how many churches and chapels are dedicated to her. With how many titles, created by popular devotion, do you invoke Mary.

2. In her Christ's radiant countenance is reflected. If we follow her with docility, the Virgin Mary will lead us to Jesus. During the month of May, that we have just begun, in the school and company of Mary, we can make a truly contemplative journey by means of the recitation of the Holy Rosary. This traditional practice is certainly a most valuable aid for contemplating the mysteries of the life of Christ.
Speaking of the Rosary, my thoughts go to the city of Pompei, which is only a short distance away. There Bl. Bartolo Longo wished to dedicate a church to Our Lady of the Holy Rosary, which has become the Marian heart of Campania, known throughout the world. When flying over the skies of this beautiful region, I thought with great affection of that beloved shrine to which, God willing, I hope to be able to return because I have only been there once.

3. These days we are living the joy of the Easter season. My thoughts go to our Eastern brothers, who, according to their calendar, celebrate today the feast of Easter. With all our heart we unite ourselves to their rejoicing over the resurrection of Christ, begging our common Lord that as soon as possible all Christians may be able to experience the joy of full unity.

I always carry in my heart the difficult situations in which many peoples of the world have to live. I wish to present to Our Lady the pleas for security and peace that arise insistently from so many sides, especially from the people of the Holy Land. I invite you to pray with me to Our Lady to ask that these heartfelt petitions be granted.
I also entrust to Our Lady the peoples of Campania and, especially, the faithful of Ischia, who honour her as the Mistress and Custodian (Castellana) of the Island. With Mary's help, may the beloved Church of Ischia be a shining beacon of Christian faith and charity.
   
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CAELI
Sunday, 28 April 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The Liturgy of the Fifth Sunday of Easter presents Christ as "the Way, the Truth and the Life" (cf. Jn 14,6). He is the only way of salvation, the full truth that makes us free, the true life that gives meaning to our existence.

His radiant countenance of glory fully reveals to us the truth of God and the truth of man. Everyone can fix his eyes on his face at any time, to find understanding, serenity and forgiveness. St Catherine of Siena, patroness of Italy and Europe, whose feast day we celebrate tomorrow (Monday 29 April) also reminds us of this. She wrote to the elders of Lucca:  "Know, dear brothers, that all of us are on the way, pilgrims and fellow travellers.... But be comforted, because we have been given a guide, and it is the only-begotten Word Incarnate, Son of God, who teaches us the way we must go on that shining path that he himself is" (Letter 168).
2. This coming Wednesday we begin the month of May dedicated to Our Lady. For centuries popular devotion has made this month a wonderful occasion for expressing in many ways our Marian devotion.
Dear brothers and sisters, let us live intensely these days dedicated to the heavenly Mother of the Lord. Let us pray the Rosary, if possible every day, either by ourself or in community. The Rosary is a simple prayer, but profound and very effective, even to ask favours for families, communities and the world.

3. In view of the international situation, where so many needs and problems have come to the surface and, in particular, in view of the unending dramatic situation in the Holy Land, we must turn with confidence to the maternal intercession of the Blessed Virgin. We may be sure that she can sustain the efforts of the one who seeks peace with sincerity and determination. No one more than she, the Queen of Peace, constantly watches over the labourious journey of humanity.
During the month of May may an uninterrupted and common prayer be raised to heaven from every part of the world so that finally initiatives for easing tension and for dialogue may be affirmed in the Land of Christ and in every other place of the globe, experiencing violence and suffering.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CAELI
Sunday, 21 April 2002 
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. This morning, in St Peter's Basilica, I ordained twenty new priests for the Diocese of Rome. I renew my warmest best wishes to them and to their parents and relatives, and those who are with them on this unique and unforgettable day. Dear new priests, if the young are the hope of the Church, how much more so are you young priests. This is why I direct to you, above all, the words that are the well known theme of World Youth Day:  "You are the salt of the earth.... You are the light of the world" (Mt 5,13).
2. Following an important custom, today, the Fourth Sunday of Easter, we observe the World Day of Prayer for Vocations. This Sunday is called "Good Shepherd" Sunday because in the Gospel Jesus applies to himself this touching Biblical title. With our eyes fixed on him, I pray for all the priests who were or will be ordained during this year, so that they will give a valid witness to the Good Shepherd with their holiness of life and their ministry. I ask all to offer a common prayer to God, especially on this day, so that the People of God will be enriched with many and holy vocations to the priesthood and to the consecrated life.

3. Our prayer continues with great insistence for the situation in the Holy Land about which unfortunately we continually receive worrisome news and images of destruction. They are images that are more powerful than any appeal and oblige everyone to leave nothing untried at every level so that the land, blessed by God, may be rescued as soon as possible from the spiral of hatred and violence.

Every day I go to Bethlehem spiritually, to the Basilica of the Nativity, where I experienced unforgettable moments during my Jubilee pilgrimage. For almost 20 days, the Basilica and adjacent buildings have been the scene of clashes, threats and unbearable exchanges of accusations. May that place, and all the holy places, be restored quickly to prayer and the pilgrims, to God and to the human person.
May the Blessed Virgin Mary obtain for the parties in conflict the courage of peace and for the international community an unyielding solidarity. May Israelis and Palestinians be able to learn to live together and may the Holy Land finally return to being a sacred land and a land of peace.
    © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II 
REGINA CAELI
Sunday, 14 April 2002
  1. At the conclusion of this solemn liturgical celebration, we turn our gaze to the Blessed Virgin Mary, whom we invoke during the Easter season with the beautiful antiphon, "Regina caeli" (Queen of heaven, rejoice). Devotion to the Virgin Mary is an integral part of the Christian life, as clearly appears in the life of the new Blesseds.

We turn to her with confidence entrusting to her in particular all those who who are suffering in the Holy Land, from where I receive all kinds of appeals. I assure everyone of our spiritual and human solidarity while I invite all to pray so that the negotations under way to re-establish respect for persons and property and to foster the advent of a just and lasting peace will be crowned with success.

2. Now, in greeting the Spanish-speaking Bishops, civil authorities, priests, religious and faithful, especially those who have come from Costa Rica, Nicaragua, Colombia and Argentina, I am pleased to recall how the new Blesseds from South America offer also a striking example of devotion to the Blessed Virgin Mary.
May the example of constant confidence in the Blessed Virgin help all, especially those of you who have been able to participate today in this solemn ceremony of beatification, so that in his own vocation, each one may be a true disciple of her Son.

3. Cordial greetings to the Italian-speaking pilgrims celebrating the beatification of Gaetano Errico and Lodovico Pavoni; a greeting I extend to their spiritual children of other nations and to those who honour Bl. Luigi Variara and Bl. Artemide Zatti, whom Providence transplanted from Italy to South America, so that they might bear fruit for the Kingdom of heaven.
Today the Day of the Catholic University of the Sacred Heart is being observed in Italy. My best wishes go to such an important institution, that, by bringing together faith and culture, offers a precious service to the whole of society. Finally, I recall that today is the Day for Organ Donations and Transplants. I wish that the solidarity of many will give hope to the numerous patients awaiting a transplant.
    © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CAELI
Sunday, 7 April 2002 
  Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1."Peace be with you!" This is how Jesus greets his Apostles in the Gospel for this Sunday, that closes the Octave of Easter. At this time this greeting has a special impact on our hearts on account of the worrisome continuation of the clashes in the Holy Land. This is the reason why I asked all the children of the Church to offer today a simultaneous and insistent prayer for peace.
2. Peace is the gift of God. The Creator himself has written the law of respect for life on the human heart:  "If anyone sheds the blood of a man, by man shall his blood be shed; for in the image of God has he made man", is said in Genesis (9,6). When the merciless logic of arms prevails everywhere, only God can redirect hearts to thoughts of peace. Only he can give the energies that are necessary to be freed from hatred and the thirst for revenge and to undertake the process of negotiation for an agreement and for peace.
How is it possible to forget that, following Abraham's example, Israelis and Palestinians believe in the one God? To him, whom Jesus revealed as the merciful Father, the common prayer of Christians is raised, who repeat with St Francis of Assisi, "Lord, make me an instrument of your peace".
At this time, my thoughts go especially to the Franciscan, Greek-Orthodox, and Armenian Orthodox communities who are passing through difficult moments in the Basilica of the Nativity. I assure everyone of my constant prayer.
3. The liturgy today invites us to see in Divine Mercy the source of that authentic peace that the risen Christ offers us. The wounds of the risen and glorious Lord are the permanent sign of God's merciful love for humanity. From them flows a spiritual light that enlightens consciences and pours into hearts comfort and hope.
In this complicated and difficult hour we repeat "Jesus, I trust in you", knowing that we need that Divine Mercy that more than a half century ago the Lord so generously manifested to St Faustina Kowalska. Wherever trials and difficulties are harsher, may the invocation of the Risen Lord be more insistent and may prayer for the gift of his Holy Spirit, source of love and peace, be more heartfelt.
4. Let us entrust our prayer to Mary, whom we will remember in a special way tomorrow, on the liturgical feast of the Annunciation of the Lord. The mystery of the conception of Jesus in the womb of the Virgin Mary by the power of the Holy Spirit, reminds us that human life, assumed by Christ, is inviolable from its first instant. Contemplation of the mystery leads us to renew the commitment to love, welcome and serve life. This is a commitment that unites believers and unbelievers alike because "the defence and promotion of life are not the monopoly of anyone, but the task and responsibility of all" (Evangelium vitae, n. 91).
May the Virgin Mary, Mother of Mercy, who at the message of the angel conceived the Incarnate Word help us to respect life always and to promote peace everywhere.
    © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CAELI
Easter Monday, 1 April 2002 
  1. The great announcement of the Resurrection of Jesus also rings out loudly this Easter Monday, which commemorates the heavenly messenger's meeting with the women who had hastened to the tomb. "Do not be afraid; for I know that you seek Jesus who was crucified. He is not here; for he has risen, as he said. Come, see the place where he lay" (Mt 28,5-6).
From the empty tomb the Angel's message spread throughout the world and reached every corner of the earth; it is a message of hope for all. Ever since the crucified Nazarene rose at dawn on the third day, it is life, no longer death, that has the last word! In the risen Lord God revealed the fullness of his love for all humanity.
2. First the women, then the disciples and Peter himself note the consoling truth:  "This Jesus God raised up, and of that we all are witnesses" (Acts 2,32).
Dear brothers and sisters, like them and with them, we too are called to spread this "good" news among the men and women of our time:  "Christ my hope is arisen" (Easter Sequence).
How I long for the Easter announcement to constantly strengthen every baptized person in the faith! How I long for peace, a gift of the risen Christ, to reach every human heart and restore hope to all who are oppressed and suffering!
3. May Mary, a silent witness of the Death and Resurrection of her Son Jesus, help us to believe totally in this mystery of salvation which, received with deep faith, can change life. May she enable us to transmit it with joy, as consistent and courageous disciples of the risen Lord, to all those we come across.
This is my hope for you all. I entrust it to Our Lady, whom we will now call upon, singing the Regina Caeli.
After leading the prayer of the Regina Caeli, the Holy Father said: 
Today I invite you to pray especially for the inhabitants of Bethlehem, the city where Jesus was born, which at this time is going through a difficult moment and is in grave danger. Indeed, we are receiving sad and disturbing news of it that troubled the atmosphere of Easter Day, which should be a feast of peace, joy and life.
The Pope is close to these brothers and sisters of ours with deep apprehension and suffering; so is the whole Church, which is praying and toiling to bring this painful calvary to an end without delay.
    © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Palm Sunday, 24 March 2002
17th World Youth Day
  At the end of the Palm Sunday Mass, the Holy Father led the recitation of the Angelus on the day in Italy consecrated to remembering missionaries martyred in the last ten years. The Pope asked Our Lady to give everyone the courage that she gave to the missionaries.
Before concluding this solemn concelebration, we direct our prayer to the Blessed Virgin Mary who under the Cross confirmed her "Fiat" spoken at the message of the Angel. May she help us to follow Jesus faithfully after the example of so many brothers and sisters who give their supreme witness of blood to the Gospel. I am thinking particularly of the missionaries who have been martyrs whom we commemorate in a special way in Italy today. May the Virgin Mary obtain this integrity and courage for our young people, called to make the fundamental decisions of their lives.
Then the Pope greeted in French, English, German, Spanish, Portuguese, and Polish the young people who came to Rome to observe Palm Sunday as a special day of preparation for World Youth Day in Toronto in July. To the English-speaking pilgrims he said: 
I warmly greet the English-speaking young people. Continue to follow the Lord with joy and enthusiasm! He has the words of eternal life! He wants you to be the light of the world and the salt of the earth! A special greeting to the group from Canada. We will meet again at the World Youth Day in Toronto. God bless you all!
     © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Fifth Sunday of Lent
17 March 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The day after tomorrow, 19 March, we will celebrate the solemnity of St Joseph, spouse of the Virgin Mary and patron of the universal Church. The extreme discretion with which Joseph carried out the role entrusted to him by God highlights his faith even more, which consisted in always listening to the Lord, seeking to understand his will and to obey it with his whole heart and strength.
This is why the Gospel describes him as a "just" man (Mt 1,19). In fact, the just man is the person who prays, lives by faith, and seeks to do good in every concrete circumstance of life.

Faith nourished by prayer: this is the most precious treasure that St Joseph transmits to us. Generations of fathers have followed in his footsteps who, with the example of a simple and laborious life, imprinted on their children's souls the inestimable value of faith, without which every other good runs the risk of being in vain. So even now, I am happy to assure all fathers of a special prayer, on the day dedicated to them: I ask God that they be men of a robust interior life, in order to fulfil their mission in the family and society in an exemplary way.

2. On the afternoon of Thursday, 21 March, the first day of spring, I will have the joy of meeting with the young people of Rome, who will gather in St Peter's Square to prepare for Palm Sunday and World Youth Day. I invite the young people of all the parishes of the diocese to this appointment. Together we will reflect on the mandate that Jesus entrusts to every baptized person: "You are the salt of the earth ... you are the light of the world" (Mt 5,13-14).
3. While we think of these upcoming ecclesial events, we look forward to Holy Week and the solemn rites of the Paschal Triduum.
May the Virgin Mary be with us in these days of Lent and make us experience her consoling protection. May every believer find in her a gentle and strong guide to meet Christ with renewed fervour in the mystery of his death and resurrection.
After the Angelus, the Holy Father asked for support for the UN Summit that begins on Monday, 18 March in Mexico. The Pope also asked for prayer for the murdered Archbishop Isaías Duarte Cancino, 63, of Calí, Colombia, killed on Saturday.
In these next days, an event of great importance will take place at Monterrey, Mexico, the International Conference on Financing for Development. I ask everyone to pray so that the international community will respond with a generous and determined commitment to the immense needs of so many brethren who live in a poverty that wounds human dignity. In this connection, I wish to recall that 35 years ago, in the month of March, the Church published a very important document, the Encyclical Populorum Progressio, in which my venerated Predecessor Paul VI pointed out the way toward humanity's common progress, affirming that "development is the new name of peace".

From Colombia comes the sad news of the death of Archbishop Isaías Duarte Cancino of Calí, barbarously assassinated as he emerged from the parish of the Good Shepherd after having celebrated numerous marriages. He was a generous and courageous pastor in announcing the Good News, he paid such a high price for his energetic defence of human life, his firm opposition to all kinds of violence, and his dedication to social development as rooted in the Gospel. While I offer prayer for the eternal rest of the deceased prelate and express my closeness to the Colombian Church that weeps over his tragic demise, I exhort Colombians once again to continue on the paths of dialogue, rejecting all kinds of violence, blackmail and kidnapping of people and to commit themselves to authentic ways of peace.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Fourth Sunday of Lent
10 March 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. "Laetare, Jerusalem (Rejoice, Jerusalem)...". With the words of the prophet Isaiah, the Church invites us to rejoice today, at the midpoint of our Lenten penitential journey. Joy and light are the dominant theme of today's liturgy. The Gospel narrates the story of "a man born blind" (Jn 9,1). Seeing him, Jesus made clay with his saliva, spread the clay on his eyes and told him:  "Go, wash in the Pool of Siloam (which means Sent). So he went and washed and came back seeing" (Jn 9,6-7).
The man born blind represents the human person marred by sin, who desires to know the truth about himself and his personal destiny, but is prevented from doing so by congenital illness. Only Jesus can cure him:  He is "the light of the world" (Jn 9,5). Handing himself over to him, every human being who is spiritually blind from birth has the fresh possibility of "coming to the light", namely to supernatural life.

2. Along with the healing of the blind man, the Gospel highlights the unbelief of the Pharisees, who refuse to acknowledge the miracle, since Jesus worked it on the sabbath, in their judgement violating the Mosaic law. Thus, an eloquent paradox emerges, that Christ himself sums up with the words:  "I have come into the world for judgement so that those who do not see might see, and those who do see might become blind" (Jn 9,39).
For the one who meets Christ, there is no other alternative: either he recognizes his need of him and of his light, or he chooses to do without. In the case of doing without Christ, the same presumption prevents both the one who thinks he is just before God and the one who considers himself an atheist, from being open to authentic conversion.

3. Dear brothers and sisters, may no one close his soul to Christ! He gives to the one who accepts him the light of faith, the light that can transform the heart, and, consequently, mentalities, social, political, and economic situations dominated by sin. "... I do believe, Lord!" (Jn 9,38). With the man born blind, may each of us be ready humbly to profess our own attachment to him.
May the Blessed Virgin Mary who is so totally pervaded by the radiance of divine grace obtain the light of Christ for us.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said in his language to the Polish pilgrims: 
I would like to greet the Primate, Cardinal Józef Glemp, Cardinal Franciszek Macharski and the Polish archbishops and bishops, together with the delegations sent by the new metropolitans of the new Dioceses. Let us thank God together for the fruits that have matured in ten years of sowing the Gospel in the new structures, which have been set up in the territory of our homeland for the good of Poland and of all its inhabitants. May reciprocal love and concern for every person be the mainspring of the Church in Poland. The Holy See is with you. God bless you all!
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Third Sunday of Lent
3 March 2002

Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. With this Sunday of Lent we enter into the heart of this special season of conversion and spiritual renewal, that will lead us to Easter.

In fact, the third, fourth and fifth Sundays of Lent form a stimulating baptismal journey, that goes back to the first centuries of Christianity, when by norm Baptism was conferred Holy Saturday night during the Easter Vigil. The "catechumens", after about three years of structured catechesis, in the last weeks of Lent achieved the final stages of their journey, receiving symbolically the Creed, the Our Father and the Gospel. This is why even today the liturgy of these Sundays is defined by the three passages from the Gospel of John proposed in an ancient order: Jesus promises living water to the Samaritan woman, gives sight to the man born blind, raises from the tomb his friend Lazarus. The baptismal perspective is explicit: through the water, symbol of the Holy Spirit, the believer receives the light and is born in faith to a new and eternal life.

2. Unfortunately, in many areas of ancient Christian tradition, the genuine religious sense is effectively disappearing. It has become urgent for Christians to regain the consciousness of their own identity. In other words, it is necessary that they rediscover their Baptism, cherishing the inexhaustible spiritual vigour of the sanctifying grace received in it in order to take it everywhere where their personal and social life takes them.
The "source of water that springs up to eternal life" (Jn 4,14), mentioned in the Gospel passage today, is present in every baptized person, but has to be continually cleared of the noxious weeds of sin so that it will not be suffocated or dried up.
3. For this reason our collaboration is indispensable. Let us accept the invitation of the liturgy to drink deeply at the sources of eternal life. May Our Lady, Mother of the Church, help those who prepare to receive Baptism and those who have already received it to achieve in these weeks a journey of radical inner renewal.

In a special way I greet the faithful of the parish of St Gelasius I, which I would have liked to visit this morning. Dear parishioners, I assure you that I was spiritually present at your celebration of the Eucharist, and that I continue to follow you in prayer. Hoping to come among you in the future, I warmly bless you.
After the Angelus the Holy Father asked for heartfelt prayer.
The news that comes from Madagascar creates in my spirit great worry and deep regret. While I trust in the traditional composure and non-violence of the Malagasy people, I beg the leaders to embark with confidence and courage on the paths of dialogue for a rapid solution of the serious crisis for the sake of the common good. I especially invite the Christian communities of the Great Island to raise fervent prayers to beg from the Lord the gift of peace in justice and in mutual respect.
Even the latest news from Jerusalem saddens me greatly. Violence, death and retaliation cannot but push the civilian population, Israeli or Palestinian, even more towards desperation and hatred. May an immediate cease fire together with a renewed sense of humanity, with respect for international law, silence the guns and make the voice of reason heard. For this reason I invite you to join me in prayer.
    © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
 ANGELUS
Sunday, 24 February 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today, the second Sunday of Lent, the Church offers us again the Gospel account of the transfiguration of Christ. Before facing the passion and cross, Jesus went "up a high mountain" (Mt 17,1), commonly identified as Tabor, together with the apostles Peter, James and John. He "was transfigured" before them:  His face and whole person shone with light.

Today's liturgy invites us to follow the Master onto Tabor, to the mountain of silence and contemplation. It is the grace that, together with my collaborators in the Roman Curia, I have had this week in our spiritual retreat, an experience I recommend to all, even in the ways it needs to be adapted to the different vocations and conditions of life. It is important, especially in the Lenten season, that Christian communities become authentic schools of prayer (cf. Novo Millennio ineunte, n. 33) in which we allow ourselves to be "conquered" by the mystery of God's light and love (cf. Phil 3,12).

2. On Tabor we understand better that the life of the cross and glory are inseparable. In accepting the Father's plan to the end, in which it was written that he would have to suffer in order to enter into his glory (cf. Lk 24,26), Christ experiences, in anticipation, the light of the resurrection.
In carrying the cross every day with faith full of love, we also experience, together with its weight and harshness, the force of renewal and of consolation. With Jesus, we receive this interior light especially in prayer.
Life changes when the heart has been "conquered" by Christ. The most generous and lasting choices are the fruit of a deep and prolonged union with God in prayerful silence.
3. We ask Our Lady of Silence, who knew how to preserve the light of faith even in the darkest hours, for the grace of a Lent that comes alive with prayer. May Mary enlighten our hearts and help us to follow faithfully in every circumstance God's plan.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
First Sunday of Lent
17 February 2002 
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Last Wednesday we began our penitential Lenten journey with the rite of the imposition of ashes, a rite charged with symbolism, rooted in the biblical tradition, and warmly embraced by popular devotion. The ashes remind us how fragile earthly life is and direct us to look to Christ, who with his passion and resurrection, has rescued us from the slavery of sin and death. It is with such heartfelt dispositions that we begin our journey to Easter, keeping our hearts open to the Lord's insistent appeal:  "Repent and believe in the Gospel" (Mk 1,15).

2. Today, the first Sunday of Lent, the liturgy offers us the dramatic Gospel page of the temptations of Jesus:  "Then Jesus was led up by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil" (Mt 4,1). The Redeemer's mission begins with his victory over the triple deceit of the prince of evil.
"Begone, Satan!" (Mt 4,10). The Messiah's resolute attitude is an example and an invitation for us to follow him with courageous determination. The devil, the "prince of this world" (Jn 12,31), even today continues his deceitful action. Every man, over and above his own concupiscence and the bad example of others, is also tempted by the devil, and the more so when he is least aware of it.
How many times he easily gives in to the false flattery of the flesh and the evil one, and then experiences bitter delusions. One must stay on guard to react quickly to the onslaught of temptation.

3. The Church, expert teacher of humanity and holiness, shows us ancient and ever new instruments for the daily combat against evil suggestions:  prayer, the sacraments, penance, careful attention to the Word of God, vigilance and fasting.
Let us undertake the penitential Lenten journey with greater determination, to be ready to defeat the seductions of Satan and arrive at Easter in joy of spirit (cf. Collect).
May Mary, Mother of Divine Mercy, be with us. I wish to entrust to her special protection the Spiritual Exercises that I will begin this evening in the Vatican, together with my collaborators of the Roman Curia. I ask all of you, dear Brothers and Sisters, to join with us in prayer so that they will be fruitful days not only for those who participate, but for the whole Church.
After the Angelus.
I am pleased to greet the Schola Cantorum of the Cardinal Vaughan Memorial School in London. May your music, your studies and your lives always be directed to the praise of God and the growth of his Kingdom.
    © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 10 February 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Tomorrow is the liturgical memorial of the Blessed Virgin Mary of Lourdes. A powerful beacon of hope was lit in the small Pyrenean city, particularly for those suffering in body and spirit, when on 11 February 1858, Our Lady appeared to St Bernadette in the grotto of Massabielle, asking that it become a place of pilgrimage and prayer.

For ten years now, this Marian feast has been associated with the observance of the World Day of the Sick, a suitable occasion for the ecclesial community to come close to sick persons, invoking for them the support of Mary who brings comfort and light to all. This year, the heart of the World Day of the Sick, will be Vailankanny, in southern India, where we find the Shrine of "Our Lady of Health", called the "Lourdes of the East", and the goal of numerous pilgrims. We  also  entrust  to  the  heavenly protection of the Mother of God people of the Hindu and other religions who willingly go to that Christian shrine.
In spiritual union, a special celebration will be held tomorrow afternoon in St Peter's, at the end of which I will have the joy of meeting the sick, health workers and volunteer associations present in the Vatican Basilica.

2. "That they may have life and have it more abundantly" (Jn 10,10). These words of Jesus, that we read in the Gospel of St John, are the theme of this year's World Day of the Sick. They recall the fundamental outlook of Christian faith that, even in the experience of sickness and death itself, is always open to life. The believer knows he can count on the power of God the Father, of the Risen Christ and of the Spirit of life. This prospect gives substance to the dedication of all those who in a multiplicity of ways, lovingly take care of the sick and the suffering:  doctors, nurses, researchers, pharmacists and volunteers. I wish to express my most cordial appreciation to all these servants of human life, among whom are many consecrated persons.

3. I want to remember especially beloved sick persons in every part of the world. I assure them of my spiritual closeness, reminding them that Christ assumed human suffering and made it an integral part of his mystery of salvation:  salvificus dolor (saving suffering). By uniting themselves with faith and love to the passion of Christ, the persons who suffer share in his victorious struggle over evil and death, as the witness of the saints shows.
Let us pray that the Virgin Mary, Health of the Sick, may assist with her protection those who suffer in body and spirit, and sustain all those who lovingly take care of them.
After the Angelus.
A considerable portion of the human family prepares to celebrate the Lunar New Year on 12 February. I think of the Chinese, Vietnamese, Koreans and others who celebrate on that occasion.
They are peoples who are particularly dear to me and I am pleased to offer them best wishes for peace, prosperity and spiritual growth. The recent "ad limina" visits of bishops from those regions gave me the opportunity of feeling close to these populations who live in Asia, populations present in my throught and in my prayer.
Next Wednesday, Ash Wednesday, we will begin Lent. As is customary, I will go in pilgrimage to the Basilica of Santa Sabina to begin the penitential journey of this sacred season. Let us prepare with prayer and works of charity to enter into this time of special grace for each Christian.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 3 February 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1.Today, the first Sunday of February, Italy is celebrating "Pro-Life Day", a wonderful occasion to reflect on the fundamental value of human life.
Recognize means to guarantee the right of the human person to lifelong development
The subject that the bishops proposed this year is: "Recognize Life". To recognize means, above all, to rediscover with renewed wonder what reason itself and science do not hesitate to call a "mystery". Life, especially human life, inspires a fundamental question that the Psalmist expresses so well:  "What is man that you are mindful of him; the son of man that you care for him?" (Ps 8,5).
Moreover, to recognize means to guarantee to every human being the right to develop according to his own potential, ensuring his inviolability from conception until natural death. No one is master of life; no one has the right to manipulate, oppress or even take life, neither that of others nor his own. Much less can he do so in the name of God, who is the only Lord and the most sincere lover of life. The martyrs themselves do not take their own lives but, in order to remain faithful to God and to his commandments, they allow themselves to be killed.

2. To recognize the value of life implies consistent measures from the legal point of view, especially the protection of human beings who are unable to defend themselves, such as the unborn, the mentally handicapped, and the most critically or terminally ill. In particular, in the study of the human embryo, science has now demonstrated that it is a human individual who possesses his own identity from the moment of fertilization. Therefore, it is logical to call for this identity to be legally recognized, above all, in its fundamental right to life, as the Italian "Pro-Life Movement" demands with praiseworthy initiative.
3. We entrust to the Holy Mother of Christ and of all human beings, the commitment in Italy and the whole world in favour of life, especially, wherever it is despised, marginalized or violated. May Mary teach us to "recognize life" as a mystery and responsibility, remembering that "gloria Dei vivens homo", "the glory of God is living man" (St Irenaeus).
After the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted in Italian and in English special groups who were present. Here is the English speaking greeting and a further Pro-Life greeting.
I warmly greet the group of families of the Diocese of Rome with the Auxiliary Bishop in charge of family life concerns, and I give a special blessing to the mothers who are expecting a child. I am pleased that in Rome the Pro-Life Day has taken the form of a Diocesan Week for Life and for the Family, at the end of which next Sunday, parishes will reflect on the welcome they give to new families who have come to live in their neighbourhood.
I am particularly pleased with the initiative of some university professors, who these days at the University of Rome "La Sapienza" have been studying in depth the theme "The embryo as patient", putting into a "declaration" the conclusions they reached about the dignity of the human being in the first phase of his existence.
I welcome all the English-speaking visitors, especially the pilgrims from St Pius the Tenth Parish in Tachikawa, Japan. Upon you and your families I cordially invoke God's blessings of joy and peace.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 27 January 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. I am still feeling intensely the emotion I experienced last Thursday on the Day of Prayer for Peace: "Violence never again! War never again! Terrorism never again! In the name of God, may every religion bring upon the earth justice and peace, forgiveness and life, love!".

This is the solemn appeal that, together with the leaders of various religions, I addressed to the men of our time, forcefully rejecting the temptation to resolve serious problems of humanity by using arms and violence. Thus we have placed another milestone on the road to building a civilization of peace and love.
Once again, today I would like to thank the religious leaders who responded to my invitation. Together we affirmed in Assisi that the mission of religion consists in fostering peaceful coexistence among peoples and cultures, in reciprocal respect. At the same time, I express my heartfelt thanks to the immense body of believers, to the innumerable individuals all over the world who were with us with their spiritual support; as well to those who, although far from religion, have shared "the spirit" of this extraordinary Day and are ready to defend and promote authentic human values.

2. I greet young people especially who, with their typical enthusiasm, showed their support in the city of St Francis on the occasion of the Meeting. The future of the world has been entrusted to them and to the new generations.
I am very happy now that a few days after the Assisi meeting, the youngsters of Rome's Catholic Action have come to St Peter's Square with the Cardinal Vicar Camillo Ruini to celebrate their "Day of Peace". Two of them are here with me and in a little while they will release two doves, symbol of peace. It is an expressive action, dedicated to the many children who, unfortunately, are still victims of war and serious injustices. May the dedication of all guarantee respect for the fundamental rights of every human being born on the face of the earth.

3. Among the human rights to be defended and promoted there is health care, that is still absent or very lacking in many parts of the globe. Diseases continue to spread that on the map of medicine have already been eliminated, such as Hansen's disease, commonly known as leprosy. The World Day of Solidarity with Leprosy Sufferers that we observe today contributes to keep the attention of public opinion on those stricken by the disease and to encourage efforts to defeat it completely.
May the Blessed Virgin Mary, with her maternal protection, comfort our sick brothers. We ask her, Mother of hope, to make grow the seeds of hope, sown these days in the hearts of many peoples. May Mary help us to build an authentic and lasting peace.
After the Angelus, the Pope added.
I greet the priests of the Archdiocese of Krakow who have come to Rome to celebrate their 10th anniversary of priestly ordination. God bless you.
I greet warmly all the pilgrims present today. As you can see, the great Nativity scene is still present in St Peter's Square. It helps us remember that God became man to remain with us always. His love is our hope.
    © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 20 January 2002
  Dear Brothers and sisters,
1. After the tragic attack last 11 September, that we never forget, and with the threat of new conflicts, believers feel the urgency to intensify their prayer for peace, because it is above all the gift of God. This is the spirit in which, the Day of Fasting was observed last 14 December, with great consensus, and, in the same spirit, the Day of Prayer for Peace will be held in Assisi this coming 24 January. Representatives of the different Christian denominations and of other religions will take part. Thus we will repeat the experience of 27 October 1986 when, for the first time, within the walls of the city of St Francis, the representatives of all the world's religions gathered together to raise to Heaven a fervent plea for peace.

2. Since then, a new spirit - often called the "spirit of Assisi" - has guided interreligious dialogue and links it indissolubly to the commitment to justice, the protection of creation and to peace. The Day of Prayer for Peace does not in any way indulge in religious syncretism. In fact, each religious group will pray in a different place in accord with its own faith, its own language, its own tradition, and with full respect for the others. What will bind together all the participants is the certainty that peace is a gift of God. As a believer, each one knows he is called to be a peacemaker.
On this basis, not only men and women of different religious affiliation can collaborate, but indeed must engage in defending and promoting effectively the recognition of human rights, an indispensable condition for authentic and lasting peace. In the face of the violence that today wreaks havoc in so many of the earth's regions, they feel the need to show that religions are a factor of solidarity, by repudiating and isolating those who abuse the Name of God for purposes or with methods that in reality offend him.

3. Next Thursday, please God, we will together make a pilgrimage by train, following the example of Blessed John XXIII, who went to Loreto and Assisi on 4 October 1962. I invite all believers and persons of good will of the whole world to join this pilgrimage, because we are all called to build peace together. I particularly want to invite religious and monastic communities, especially the cloistered ones, to join in our prayer, along with children, the sick and the elderly.
May Mary, Queen of Peace, obtain for humanity the precious gift of peace, and help us be in every sector of life, as was Francis, instruments of the peace that God alone can give.
After praying the Angelus the Holy Father said:
Once again - and with great sadness - I am forced to recall the tragic situation in the Holy Land, where every day repeated attacks and reprisals sow blood and death.
There is no way out of this perverse logic and it is painful to see how the leaders of the conflict have gone down a blind alley.

I can only address a heartfelt appeal to the leaders of the parties in conflict to put an end to these clashes, and to the international community not to abandon them. It is urgently necessary to identify together those instruments that can set in motion the dynamic of peace, and so allow Israelis and Palestinians to face their future.
May God, through the intercession of the Virgin Mary, enlighten the mind and heart of every person of good will!
I also assure my spiritual closeness to the peoples struck by the fury unleashed by the Nyiragongo Volcano, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, that has once again become active, erupting with unheard of violence. Let us bring concrete assistance to all who are suffering because of this great disaster!
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Feast of the Baptism of the Lord
Sunday, 13 January 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. This year once again I have had the joy of baptizing some babies on the feast of the Baptism of the Lord. The Gospels place this event at the beginning of the public life of Jesus. Indeed, it is the first manifestation of Jesus as Son of God, sent by the Father to take on himself and take away the sin of the world (cf. Jn 1,29). As soon as he was baptized in the Jordan River, the heavens were opened the Holy Spirit came down upon him in the form of a dove, while from on high a mysterious announcement resounded:  "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased" (Mt 3,17).
The Lord was thus manifested as "the Christ", consecrated by God in the Holy Spirit, and sent by him to announce to the poor the joyful message of salvation (cf. Is 61,1-2). The purpose of his mission is to baptize human beings in the Holy Spirit (cf. Mt 3,11; Jn 1,33), namely, to communicate to them the "fire" of divine life (cf. Lk 12,49-50). It is what will be fully realized with his death and resurrection, a mystery, in which they who have received the sacrament of Baptism are made partakers.

2. An important meeting of preparation for the 17th World Youth Day is being held these days in Toronto. The Day will take place in the month of July this year in Toronto. I want to send cordial greetings to the delegates of the Bishops' Conferences, associations and ecclesial movements from every corner of the globe that are taking part in this meeting. I thank the Pontifical Council for the Laity and the Canadian Committee for their pastoral and organizational work, and I hope that the world youth event in Canada will renew the magnificent experience of Rome 2000.
For this reason, I am thinking of you, dear young people, already in spirit "on the way" to Toronto, through the formative and missionary endeavours of the communities to which you belong. I am eager to meet you again in Toronto in large numbers. Lay aside all fear and uncertainty; remember that you must be the "sentinels of the morning", always ready to proclaim the advent of the new day, which is the Risen Lord.
3. I entrust to Mary the preparation and observance of World Youth Day. I also invoke her maternal protection for the babies I have baptized this morning, so that together with their parents, godfathers and godmothers they may grow up to be faithful disciples of the Lord. As the liturgical season of Christmas and Epiphany comes to a close, may Our Lady help us all to continue on our way in the light of truth and love that Christ brought to humanity with his birth at Bethlehem.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
 SOLEMNITY OF THE EPIPHANY OF THE LORD
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 6 January 2002
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The Solemnity of the Epiphany celebrates the universality of the Church and her missionary vocation. The Church rejoices today because "the true light that enlightens every man" (Jn 1,9) has been manifested to all peoples.
Like Mary, she rejoices to see persons of every race, nation and culture enter the humble cave of Bethlehem to adore the Son of God. At the same time, increasingly she realizes how urgent it is to be "light" to spread the saving message to every people. The missionary mandate is for all believers, called to proclaim and witness to the mystery of salvation that was realized in the Incarnation, Death and Resurrection of Christ.

2. Today the Church entrusts the mission of evangelization in a special way to children. This is the meaning of the Children's World Missionary Day, that has the theme this year: "Enkindle hope" and calls "missionary children" to spread the light of solidarity especially where the darkness of poverty, sorrow and war is particularly dense. The missionary support of children is precious for so many missionaries, faithful to the mandate of Christ, who work for the propagation of the faith to the ends of the earth. Our grateful thought and constant prayer to the Lord goes to each one of these fearless evangelizers.
The new Bishops that I had the joy of consecrating this morning will dedicate all their energy especially to the demanding missionary task. I greet them cordially, their families and those who join in their spiritual joy. Dear Brothers and Sisters, let us back up their ministry with our prayer so that they will be sound guides of the flock that the Lord has entrusted to them.

3. Today Eastern Churches, such as the Russian Orthodox, and the ancient Oriental Churches such as the Coptic, Ethiopian and Armenian celebrate Christmas. Our best wishes go to them and the assurance of continuing prayer. May the celebration of the coming of the Word of God among men be the source of new spiritual vigour, of new spiritual strength of communion among us, who recognize him as Lord and Saviour. May it be a source of joy in proclaiming him to the people of our time.
May the heavenly Mother of God, who holds on her knees the Wisdom of the Father, obtain for Christians the gift of full communion and peace. Through her intercession, may the life giving light of the mystery of the Birth of our Lord enlighten every person of good will.
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
 SOLEMNITY OF MARY, MOTHER OF GOD 
XXXV WORLD DAY OF PEACE 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Tuesday, 1 January 2002

Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Happy New Year to all! We exchange this greeting, at the beginning of 2002, under the gaze of the Blesed Virgin Mary whom we venerate today as Mother of God. Best wishes for peace and serenity on this World Day of Peace, an annual observance established by my Venerable Predecessor the Servant of God Paul VI in 1968. Humanity needs peace if it wants to build the civilization of love. Unfortunately, at the present moment of history, worries and difficulties hinder this task; but it must not and cannot be abandoned. We must respond with the logic of justice and love to all the opposing realities forged by malevolent persons intent on making the world into a theatre of war.

2. This is the context of the Message for this Day of Peace in which I wished to reaffirm that "There is no peace without justice, and no justice without forgiveness". In fact, no one can restore the shattered order unless justice and forgiveness are combined.
I appeal particularly to the men and women who experienced the terrible world wars of the last century. I turn to the youth who, fortunately, did not undergo those conflicts. To all I say: together we must firmly oppose the temptation of hatred and violence, that only gives the illusion of resolving conflicts but instead causes real and permanent damage. Instead, forgiveness, that can appear to be weakness, demands great spiritual strength and guarantees long-term advantages.
Pardon is opposes the instinct of responding to evil with evil, is especially for Christians, an attitude motivated by profound religious faith that also rests on rational foundations. For everyone, believers and non-believers alike, it is the golden rule to do to others whatever you would have them do to you. Applied at the social and international level, this ethical principle is a sure way to create a world of greater justice and solidarity.

3. In a globalized world, where threats to justice and peace mainly effect the weakest, there must be a global mobilization of consciences. The Great Jubilee of 2000 laid the foundations for it.
We must not be discouraged by the trials of history, but persevere in the task of conforming our personal, familiar and social choices to what is right and just. The same is true for the policies of national and international development.
We turn to the Mother of God in heaven to obtain from her the peace of Christ for the world. At the dawn of this New Year, we confidently entrust to her the Church and all mankind.
After the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the Nations of the European Union, the President of the Italian Republic, and all of those present representing the different cultural groups, addressing them in French, German, Spanish, Portuguese, Polish, Russian and Arabic.
I extend a special greeting of peace and of prosperity to the Nations of the European Union that today, with a single new currency, have reached an historical goal. I very much hope that this will favour the full development of the citizens in the various countries. May justice and solidarity grow throughout Europe for the advantage of the entire human family!
In turn I express my respectful thanks and best wishes to the President of the Italian Republic, wishing him every good in his high office at the service of the Nation. To all Italians, and in particular, to those who live in the beloved city of Rome, I am pleased to renew my best wishes:  may each one make a genuine contribution to the common good, in accordance with his/her legitimate private interests. Happy New Year to everyone, in the love and peace of Christ!

To the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors, the Pope gave this greeting:
As we begin this New Year, let us together invoke God's gifts of peace, harmony and solidarity upon the world's peoples. May the Lord strengthen you and your families in faith and love, and fill you with his choicest blessings. Happy New Year!
  © Copyright 2002 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Feast of the Holy Family
Sunday, 28 December 2003
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today, a few days after Christmas, the Church contemplates the Holy Family. At the school of Nazareth every family learns to be a workshop of love, unity and openness to life.
In our day a misunderstood sense of rights sometimes troubles the very nature of the family institution and of the conjugal bond. People who believe in the importance of the family based on marriage should join forces at all levels. The family is a human and divine reality that should be defended and promoted as a fundamental social good.
2. Christians, the Second Vatican Council recalls, attentive to the signs of the times, should actively "promote the values of marriage and the family, both by the example of their own lives and by cooperation with other men and women of good will" (Gaudium et Spes, n. 52). We must proclaim the Gospel of the family with joy and courage. To this end, let us raise our common prayer to Jesus, Mary and Joseph for all families, and for those in material and spiritual difficulty in particular.
3. Let us also pray for the inhabitants of Bam, Iran, who in the past few days have been the victims of a very violent earthquake. Let us entrust to the merciful God the thousands of people who have lost their lives, as well as the injured and the survivors, left homeless and in need of help. I ask the international organizations and especially the Catholic relief agencies to come generously to the aid of our Iranian brothers and sisters struck by such terrible disasters. May solidarity across the world, particularly tangible in this atmosphere of Christmas, make their situation less tragic.
    © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Feast of St. Stephen
Friday, 26 December 2003
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today, in the joyful atmosphere of Christmas, we are celebrating the Feast of St Stephen, one of the first deacons of the Church. He is also known as the "Protomartyr" because he was the first disciple of Christ to pour out his blood for him. Stephen was stoned to death because of false accusations similar to those levelled at Jesus himself and, like the Master, he died forgiving those who killed him.
2. The Church calls the day of martyrdom a dies natalis (birthday). Indeed, by virtue of Christ's death and Resurrection, the death of the martyr is a birth in Heaven. This is why it is so meaningful to celebrate the First Martyr the day after Christmas: Jesus who was born in Bethlehem gave his life for us so that we too, reborn "from on high" through faith and Baptism, might be willing to give up our own lives for love of our brothers and sisters.
Today I would especially like to remember the Christian communities that are suffering persecution and all the faithful who suffer for the faith. May the Lord give them the strength to persevere and the ability to love even those who cause their suffering.
3. May Mary, Mother and disciple of her Son Jesus, accompany all Christians on their journey, from the baptismal font to the hour of their death. May she, Queen of the Martyrs, help us too to be "martyrs", that is, witnesses on every occasion to the love of Christ whom we contemplate in these days as a Child in the crib.
  © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Fourth Sunday of Advent, 21 December 2003
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Christmas is almost here. As the final touches are being given to the Nativity scene and the Christmas tree - in St Peter's Square as well - it is necessary to prepare the soul to live intensely this great mystery of faith.
During the final days of Advent, the Liturgy puts particular emphasis on the figure of Mary. The beginning of the Incarnation of the Redeemer took place in her heart, from her "Here I am" full of faith, in reply to the divine call. If we wish to understand the genuine meaning of Christmas, we must look at her, call upon her.
2. Mary, Mother par excellence, helps us to understand the key words of the mystery of the birth of her divine Son:  humility, silence, wonder, joy.
She exhorts us, first of all, to humility, so that God can find space in our heart, not darkened by pride and arrogance. She points out to us the value of silence, which knows how to listen to the song of the Angels and the crying of the Child, not stifling them by noise and confusion. Together with her, we stop before the Nativity scene with intimate wonder, savouring the simple and pure joy that this Child gives to humanity.
3. In the Holy Night the rising Star, "splendour of eternal light, sun of justice" (cf. Antiphon of the Magnificat, 21 December), comes to enlighten whoever dwells in darkness and in the shadow of death. Guided by today's Liturgy, we make the sentiments of the Virgin our own, remaining in anxious expectation for the Birth of Christ.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said: 
I greet the Italian-speaking pilgrims, especially the "For an added hope" Association of Verona whose name is in tune with the spirit of Christmas nearly here: indeed, Jesus comes to give hope to every man and woman and to the entire human family.
I wish everyone a pleasant Sunday.


© Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Third Sunday of Advent, 14 December 2003
  1. "Rejoice in the Lord always.... The Lord is near" (Phil 4: 4-5).
With these words of the Apostle Paul the liturgy invites us to be joyful. It is the Third Sunday of Advent and is known as "Gaudete" Sunday for this very reason. These are the words the Servant of God Pope Paul VI chose for his memorable Apostolic Exhortation on Christian joy: "Gaudete in Domino!".
2. Advent is a season of rejoicing because it revives the expectation of the most joyful event in history:  the birth of the Son of God by the Virgin Mary.
To know that God is not distant but close, not indifferent but compassionate, not aloof but a merciful Father who follows us lovingly with respect for our freedom:  all this is a cause of deep joy which the alternating ups and downs of daily life cannot touch.
3. An unmistakable feature of Christian joy is that it can go hand in hand with suffering, since it is based entirely on love. Indeed, the Lord who "is near", to the point of becoming man, comes to fill us with his joy, the joy of loving. Only in this way can we understand the serene joy of the martyrs even amid trial, or the smile of saints, full of charity for those who are suffering:  a smile that does not offend but consoles.
"Hail, full of grace, the Lord is with you!" (Lk 1: 28). The Angel's announcement to Mary is an invitation to rejoice. Let us ask the Holy Virgin for the gift of Christian joy.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Pope had a special word for the children of Rome who had come for the blessing of the Baby Jesus figurines for their home Nativity scenes. He also greeted pilgrims from Spain.
I greet with affection the children of Rome who have come for the traditional blessing of the "Baby Jesus"; and I thank the Roman Centre of After-School Activities which has organized this lovely event. Dear children and boys and girls, when you place the statue of the Baby Jesus in your Nativity scene, say a prayer for me and for all the people who turn to the Pope in their difficulties. Happy Christmas to you all!
I warmly greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims, especially the faithful from the parishes of San Pablo and Santa María y los Dolores in Murcia, and of La Merced in Madrid. May Advent prepare your hearts for the encounter with Christ! Many thanks.
I wish you all a good Sunday!
© Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
SOLEMNITY OF THE IMMACULATE CONCEPTION
OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Monday, 8 December 2003
  1. "Tota pulchra es Maria - You are all fair, O Mary".
Today the Church is celebrating the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary. If Christ is the day that never fades, Mary is its dawn, shining with beauty.
Chosen in advance to be the Mother of the incarnate Word, Mary is at the same time the first-fruits of his redeeming action. The grace of Christ the Redeemer acted in her in anticipation, preserving her from original sin and from any contagion of guilt.
2. This is why Mary is "full of grace" (Lk 1: 28), as the Angel affirms when he brings her the announcement of her divine motherhood. The human mind cannot claim to understand so great a miracle and mystery. It is faith which reveals to us that the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin is a pledge of salvation for every human creature, a pilgrim on this earth. Again, it is faith which reminds us that by virtue of her unique position, Mary is our steadfast support in the arduous struggle against sin and its consequences.
3. This afternoon, following a beautiful tradition, I will go to Piazza di Spagna. In this way, I will pay homage to the Immaculate Virgin. Blessed Pope Pius IX had a statue of her set on a column in eternal memory of the Dogma of the Immaculate Conception, proclaimed on 8 December 1854. With today's pilgrimage, therefore, we enter the 150th anniversary of that solemn act of the Church's Magisterium.
I invite you straightaway to join me in praying for the intercession of Mary Immaculate for the Church, for the city of Rome and for the whole world.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said: 
I am now pleased to greet Cardinal Andrzej Maria Deskur and the members of the Pontifical Academy of Mary Immaculate. I thank you, dear friends, for coming here and for your commitment to spreading the devotion to the Blessed Virgin.
I cordially greet the German-speaking pilgrims, especially the members and friends of the Schönstatt Association. Place your trust in the intercession of Mary, Mater Ter Admirabilis and Mother of the Church. May God's blessings go with you!
My affectionate greeting to the pilgrims present. May the Immaculate Virgin protect you all.
New Roman
  © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Second Sunday of Advent, 7 December 2003
  1. "Prepare the way of the Lord, clear him a straight path" (Lk 3: 4).
This invitation of St John the Baptist resounds strongly on this Second Sunday of Advent. It is a prophetic cry that continues to resound through the centuries.
We consider this cry also in our present day, as humanity continues its journey in history. To the men and women of the third millennium in search of serenity and peace, he indicates the necessary path to take.
2. The entire Liturgy of Advent echoes the Precursor, inviting us to encounter Christ who comes to save us. We are preparing to commemorate the birth which took place in Bethlehem 2,000 years ago; we renew our faith in his glorious coming at the end of time. At the same time, we prepare to recognize his presence among us:  indeed, he also visits us through the people and events of daily life.
3. Mary is our model and guide in this spiritual programme typical of Advent, she who is much more blessed not for having generated Christ, but for having believed in him (cf. St Augustine, Serm. 25, 7: PL 46, 937). In Mary, preserved immaculate from every sin and filled with grace, God found the "good soil" where he planted the seed of the new humanity.
May the Immaculate Virgin, whose feast we are celebrating tomorrow, help us to prepare well "the way of the Lord", in ourselves and in the world.
After the prayer of the Angelus, the Holy Father said the following: 
In preparation for Christmas, on Thursday, 11 December at 5 p.m., Holy Mass will be celebrated in St Peter's Basilica for students of the Roman Universities. Dear young university students, I await your numerous presence, together with your friends from other European Countries who are in Rome to reflect together on their contribution to building the future of Europe.
To all of you, dear pilgrims, I wish a good Sunday and a happy feast of the Immaculate Conception.
    © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
First Sunday of Advent, 30 November 2003
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today the season of Advent begins, the journey of spiritual renewal in preparation for Christmas. The voices of the prophets who proclaim the Messiah ring out in the liturgy, asking for conversion of heart and for prayer. John the Baptist, the last of these and the greatest, cries out: "Prepare the way of the Lord!" (Lk 3: 4), because he "will come to visit his people in peace".
2. Come Christ, Prince of Peace! Preparing for his Birth means reawakening the hope of peace in ourselves and throughout the world. Build peace in hearts first of all, by laying down the weapons of rancour, revenge and every form of selfishness.
The world cries out for this peace! I am thinking especially with deep sorrow of the latest episodes of violence in the Middle East and on the African Continent, as well as of those that daily newspapers are recording in so many other parts of the Globe. I renew my appeal to the leaders of the great religions:  let us join forces in preaching non-violence, forgiveness and reconciliation! "Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth" (Mt 5: 5).
3. In this journey of expectation and hope that is Advent, the Ecclesial Community is identified more closely than ever with the Most Holy Virgin. May it be she, the Virgin of expectation, who helps us to open our hearts to the One who, by his coming among us, brings the priceless gift of peace to all humanity.
After  leading the prayer of the Angelus the Holy Father said the following:
Tomorrow is World AIDS Day, which recalls a disease that is still spreading quickly, especially in the poorest Countries. As I pray for those who are afflicted by this scourge, I encourage all in the Church who are rendering an incalculable service of acceptance, care and spiritual guidance to these brothers and sisters of ours.
I greet the Italian-speaking pilgrims and, in particular, the members of the Sant'Egidio Community who, in collaboration with many cities in the world, are launching another international campaign against the death penalty.
I wish everyone a good Sunday!
 

© Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Solemnity of Jesus Christ, King of the Universe
Sunday, 23 November 2003
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today, the last Sunday of the liturgical year, we are celebrating the Solemnity of Jesus Christ, King of the Universe. In recent months we have contemplated him in all his mysteries, from his Birth to his Ascension into Heaven, centring on Easter with his Death and Resurrection. Together with the Apostle Paul, we recognize that God's plan is "to unite all things in him, things in heaven and things on earth" (Eph 1: 10).
2. The mission of believers, called to cooperate in building God's Kingdom with their different ministries and charisms, acquires its full importance on contemplating the One whom the Eastern Liturgy calls the "Pantocrator". I would also like to set against this background a specific ecclesial event that is taking place in Rome in these days. I am referring to the Congress on Sacred Music organized by the St Cecilia Association for the centenary of the Motu Proprio Tra le Sollecitudini, an important Instruction on sacred music promulgated by Pope St Pius X.
I offer a cordial greeting to the many participants and express my gratitude to all those who put their musical talent and skill at the service of the liturgy.
3. Beside Jesus, King of the Universe, let us contemplate Mary, the Mother of the King, whom we therefore invoke as Queen of Heaven and Earth. May she help us make our life a canticle of praise and fidelity to God who is holy and merciful.
After leading the Angelus and imparting his Apostolic Blessing, the Pope greeted the faithful in Italian, Spanish and Polish. Here is a translation: 
I greet those taking part in the International Festival of Music and Sacred Art, especially the friends of sacred music from Germany, the Wiener Philarmoniker from Austria, the musicians from St Petersburg and the choir members from the United States of America.
I cordially greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims, especially the faithful from San Lorenzo and San Andrés de Murcia. May Christ, Lord of the Universe, reign in your hearts forever!
I cordially greet the pilgrims from Poland: the Franciscan Sisters of the Family of Mary from Toporów, St Francis of Assisi Parish, those who have come on their own and all those who have joined us via radio and television.
Tomorrow, Vatican Radio's Polish Programme will be celebrating 65 years of apostolic work. I embrace with my thoughts all the employees who have proclaimed the Gospel in Polish with zeal and dedication in these years. May God reward them!
I greet the Italian-speaking pilgrims, particularly the members of the Religious Association of Social and Health-Care Institutions that will shortly be celebrating 40 years of activity.
I wish everyone a good Sunday!
  © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 16 November 2003
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Once again in these past days, terrorism has struck with its ill-fated results, particularly devastating in Iraq and in Turkey. As I continue to pray for the victims, I renew to the many families mourning their dead the attestation of my spiritual closeness. At the same time I express deep solidarity to all those who are doing their utmost to treat those who are injured and to repair the damage caused. No one can yield to the temptation of discouragement or retaliation: respect for life, international solidarity and the observance of the law must prevail over hatred and violence.
2. In this context, I renew my firm condemnation of every terrorist act perpetrated recently in the Holy Land. At the same time I must point out that the dynamism of peace seems, unfortunately, to have been halted. Many see the building of a wall between the Israeli and Palestinian peoples as yet another obstacle on the path to peaceful coexistence. Indeed, the Holy Land does not need walls, but bridges! Without the reconciliation of souls, there can be no peace.
3. Let us entrust the peoples in that part of the world to the God of mercy and peace, though the intercession of Mary Most Holy. May those responsible have the courage to resume dialogue and negotiations and thereby unblock the road to a Middle East reconciled in justice and in peace.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father noted that this was World Day for Road Accident Victims, [Italian] National Day for Cancer Research and World Migration Day. He also announced the World Congress on the Pastoral Care of Migrants and Refugees to be held in Rome in the next few days:
Today is World Day for Road Accident Victims. As I entrust them to the Lord, I renew my pressing appeal to show constant respect for human life and measures of safety.
In Italy today we are celebrating World Migration Day. I join in the message of the Italian Bishops' Conference that focuses on solidarity within the bounds of the law. I renew my cordial encouragement to all those who spread the Gospel among migrants.
The World Congress on the Pastoral Care of Migrants and Refugees will be taking place in Rome during the next few days. At this time I welcome the participants and offer best wishes for this important event.
Lastly, on the occasion of the [Italian] National Day for Cancer Research, I am close to the sick and to all who nurse them, and I am hoping for the best possible progress in the field of research.
I greet the faithful from the Armenian Catholic Parish of St Teresa of Heliopolis of Cairo in Egypt, for which Patriarch Nerses Bedros XIX of Cilicia for the Armenians is responsible.
I greet all the pilgrims present here and wish them all a good Sunday and a good week. Praised be Jesus Christ!
    © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 9 November 2003
  At the end of this celebration, I would like to greet all the pilgrims present.
To French-speaking pilgrims
I greet the French-speaking pilgrims who have come for the Beatification of Fr Valentin Paquay and of St Rosalie Rendu, in particular, the members of their Religious Families, the Bishops, and those who are responsible for civil society.
To Spanish-speaking pilgrims
I cordially greet the Spanish-speaking Bishops, priests and faithful, as well as the civil authorities who are present for the Beatification of Juan Nepomuceno Zegrí and Mother Bonifacia Rodríguez. I greet especially the Sisters of Charity of the Blessed Virgin Mary of Mercy and the Servants of St Joseph.
To Italian-speaking pilgrims
I greet the pilgrims who have come from Italy and from other countries, especially the Sons of the Immaculate Conception, celebrating the Beatification of their founder, Luigi Maria Monti. I thank the Bishops and the civil authorities for their presence.
We now turn in prayer to Mary, Queen of Saints and model of Christians.
  © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Commemoration of All the Faithful Departed (All Souls Day)
Sunday, 2 November 2003 
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. After having celebrated yesterday the Solemnity of All Saints, today, 2 November, our prayerful gaze is directed toward those who have departed from this world and are awaiting arrival into the Heavenly City. The Church has always strongly advised that we pray for the dead. She invites believers to regard the mystery of death not as the "last word" of human destiny but rather as a passage to eternal life. As we read in the Preface of today's Mass:  "When the body of our earthly dwelling lies in death we gain an everlasting dwelling place in heaven".
2. It is an important obligation to pray for the dead, because even if they have died in grace and in God's friendship, they may still need final purification in order to enter the joy of Heaven (cf. Catechism of the Catholic Church, n. 1030). Prayer for the dead is expressed in various ways, one of which is also visiting the cemeteries. Pausing in these sacred places becomes an ideal occasion to reflect on the meaning of earthly life and at the same time to nourish hope in the blessed eternity of Paradise.
May Mary, Gate of Heaven, help us never to forget and never to lose sight of the Heavenly Homeland, the final destination of our pilgrimage here on earth.
Following the Angelus, the Holy Father said the following: 
I cordially greet the pilgrims who have come to recite together with us the prayer of the Angelus, which we have offered for the deceased, especially for the most forgotten.
To all who are here present I wish a blessed Sunday!
  © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Solemnity of All Saints
Saturday, 1 November 2003
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today we celebrate the Solemnity of All Saints. It invites us to turn our gaze to the immense multitude of those who have already reached the blessed Homeland, pointing us to the road which leads to that destination.
The Saints and Blesseds of Paradise remind us, as pilgrims on Earth, that prayer, above all, is our sustenance for each day so that we never lose sight of our eternal destiny. For many of them the Rosary - the prayer to which the year just ended was dedicated - was the privileged instrument for their daily discourse with the Lord. The Rosary led them to an ever more profound intimacy with Christ and with the Blessed Virgin.
2. The Rosary can truly be a simple and accessible way for all to holiness, which is the vocation of each baptized person, as today's feast highlights.
In the Apostolic Letter Novo Millennio Ineunte, I reminded all the faithful that holiness is the primary requirement of the Christian life (cf. nn. 30-31).
May Mary, Queen of all the Saints, already totally immersed in divine glory, help us to proceed with haste on the demanding road of Christian perfection. May she help us to understand and to appreciate ever more the recitation of the Rosary as an evangelical work of contemplation of the mystery of Christ and of faithful acceptance of his will.
Following the Angelus, the Holy Father said the following: 
According to pious custom, it is customary in these days for the faithful to visit the tombs of their loved ones and to pray for them.
I, too, am making a spiritual pilgrimage to the cemeteries of the various parts of the world, where rest the remains of those who have preceded us in the sign of faith.
In particular, I raise my prayer of support for those whom no one remembers as well as for the many victims of violence. I entrust all to the Divine Mercy.
    © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 26 October 2003
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. I still have vivid memories of the intense emotion of these days, when so many people gathered round me on the occasion of the 25th Anniversary of my Pontificate. First of all, I renew my thanks to God, rich in mercy, for these 25 years of ministry at the service of the Church. I then desire to express deep gratitude to my brother Cardinals, Patriarchs and Bishops who desired to take part in this jubilee event in such great numbers, witnessing yet again to their sincere communion with the See of Peter.
I likewise thank the Heads of State and the Authorities of so many Countries who sent me their congratulations.
Lastly, I address a heartfelt "thank you" to all the priests, consecrated persons and faithful who joined me in spirit with their good wishes and the precious gift of prayer. I am thinking especially of the sick, who have been close to me with the offering of their suffering.
Nor has there been any lack of testimonials from Christians of other Confessions, as well as from the followers of other religions. I offer them all my heartfelt thanks.
2. I ask the Lord to reward you, dear brothers and sisters, for the affection and support you have expressed to me. I renew the entrustment of my life and my ministry to the Virgin Mary, Mother of the Redeemer and Mother of the Church. To her I repeat with filial abandonment: Totus tuus!
  © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
BEATIFICATION OF MOTHER THERESA OF CALCUTTA
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
World Mission Sunday
Sunday, 19 October 2003
  I offer warm greetings to the English-speaking pilgrims, especially those from India and the United States. May the example of Mother Teresa increase your love of the Lord and inspire ever greater service to the needy.
I greet the Macedonian-speaking pilgrims.
I greet the Albanian-speaking pilgrims.
I greet the pilgrims from Italy, Europe and the whole world, especially the men and women Missionaries of Charity and all those who work with them to serve the poorest of the poor.
As we now prepare to recite the Angelus, let us recall that Mary Most Holy was always Mother Teresa's model, both in her prayers and in her missionary action. Through the intercession of the new Blessed, may the Virgin obtain for us to progress in our love of God and neighbour.
  © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 12 October 2003 
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Next Thursday, 16 October, will be the 25th anniversary of my Pontificate. At 6: 00 p.m. in St Peter's Square I will celebrate a solemn Mass of Thanksgiving. I immediately thank all those who will be joining me in prayer, thanking God for his continuous and providential help.
2. Those days of October 1978 flash across my mind. Today I am thinking especially of the first Angelus that I recited from this window on 22 October. I then sought to "embrace" in the mystery of the Incarnation, which this prayer helps us to contemplate, "the whole future of the Pontificate, of the People of God and of the whole human family, because", I said, "the family begins with the father's will, but is always conceived under the mother's heart" (L'Osservatore Romano English edition, 2 November 1978, p. 2).
3. Now, as I think back to the past with gratitude, I turn my gaze on the young people with whom I have built up a preferential dialogue since the very beginning of my Petrine ministry. I recall that at the end of that first Angelus I added a special greeting to them, saying, "You are the future of the world, the hope of the Church. You are my hope!".
I must recognize that their response was truly encouraging. Today I would like to thank them for having been constantly close to me in these years, and I would like them to know that I continue to count on them.
I entrust them, O Mary, to you who are the eternal youth of the Church. Help them to be ready and available to do God's will, in order to build generously a world that is more just and more fraternal.
I wish you all an enjoyable Sunday!
     © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 5 October 2003  
 At the end of this celebration, I wish to greet the numerous pilgrims who have come to pay homage to the new Saints.
I cordially welcome the groups of pilgrims and the delegations that have come from Germany, Austria and South Tyrol. I especially greet the members of the Religious Family from Steyl. May the new Saints help you all to be witnesses of God's grace for humanity!
I greet all the English-speaking pilgrims. Inspired by the lives of the new Saints, may you be filled with joy and deepen your love of the universal Church. God bless you all!
I greet all the pilgrims who have come from Poland. May God bless you all!
I greet with affection the Italian-speaking pilgrims, especially the missionaries of the widespread Comboni and Divine Word Families and the faithful who have come from the Dioceses of Verona and Bolzano-Bressanone, together with their Bishops.
Spiritually united to the new Saints, let us now call upon Mary under the title of Our Lady of the Rosary, referring to the Shrine of Pompei where, God willing, I will be making a pilgrimage the day after tomorrow.
     © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 28 September 2003
Dear Brothers and Sisters!
1. The beginning of the month of October is nearly here, the month of the Holy Rosary. In a particular way, I entrust to Our Lady the Consistory which I intend to hold on 21 October to celebrate the occasion of my 25th Year of Pontificate. Once again, over and above the set numerical limit, I will create some new Cardinals in this Consistory.
2. Among them, there are in the first place some of my Collaborators of the Roman Curia.
They are the following:
- Archbishop Jean-Louis Tauran;
- Archbishop Renato Raffaele Martino;
- Archbishop Francesco Marchisano;
- Archbishop Julián Herranz;
- Archbishop Javier Lozano Barragán;
- Archbishop Stephen Fumio Hamao;
- Archbishop Attilio Nicora.
There are also 19 Pastors of local Churches. They are the following:
- Archbishop Angelo Scola, Patriarch of Venice, Italy;
- Archbishop Anthony Olubunmi Okogie of Lagos, Nigeria;
- Archbishop Bernard Panafieu of Marseilles, France;
- Archbishop Gabriel Zubeir Wako of Khartoum, Sudan;
- Archbishop Carlos Amigo Vallejo, O.F.M., of Seville, Spain;
- Archbishop Justin Francis Rigali of Philadelphia, United States of America;
- Archbishop Keith Michael Patrick O'Brien of Saint Andrews and Edinburgh, Scotland;
- Archbishop Eusébio Oscar Scheid, S.C.I., of São Sebastião do Rio de Janeiro, Brazil;
- Archbishop Ennio Antonelli of Florence, Italy;
- Archbishop Tarcisio Bertone, S.D.B., of Genoa, Italy;
- Archbishop Peter Kodwo Appiah Turkson of Cape Coast, Ghana;
- Archbishop Telesphore Placidus Toppo of Ranchi, India;
- Archbishop George Pell of Sydney, Australia;
- Archbishop Josip Bozanic of Zagreb, Croatia;
- Archbishop Jean-Baptiste Pham Minh Mân of Hô Chi Minh City, Vietnam;
- Archbishop Rodolfo Quezada Toruño of Guatemala City, Guatemala;
- Archbishop Philippe Barbarin of Lyons, France;
- Archbishop Péter Erdö of Esztergom-Budapest, Hungary;
- Archbishop Marc Ouellet, P.S.S., of Quebec, Canada.
Together with the new Cardinals, there are four clergymen especially worthy of mention for their dedicated service to the Church. They are:
- Rev. Georges Marie Martin Cottier, O.P., Theologian of the Papal Household, Switzerland;
- Rev. Mons. Gustaaf Joos of Ghent, Belgium;
- Rev. Tomás Spidlík, S.J., of the Czech Republic;
- Rev. Stanislas Nagy of the Priests of the Sacred Heart of Jesus (Dehonian Fathers), Poland.
Finally, I inform you that I have appointed another well deserving Archbishop as Cardinal, reserving his name "in pectore".
3. The candidates to be raised to the dignity of Cardinal come from various parts of the world and hold different positions in the service of the People of God. They fully reflect the universality of the Church, with its numerous and varied ministries.
We entrust the newly-appointed candidates to the Holy Virgin, invoking her maternal protection upon them and on their respective duties in the Lord's vineyard.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the English-speaking pilgrims, saying:
I warmly welcome the English-speaking visitors present at this "Angelus" prayer, most especially the pilgrims from the Diocese of Galway, Ireland, and the group of visitors from the Zon en Schild Clinic in Amersfoort, the Netherlands. May Almighty God continue to bless all of you with peace and joy.
    © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 21 September 2003
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Continuing on my spiritual pilgrimage to the Shrine of Pompei, which I am looking forward to visiting, please God, this coming 7 October, I would like today to pause and meditate on the mysteries of the Rosary known as "the mysteries of light". They integrate the traditional moments of the childhood, passion and glory of Christ with those, equally important, of his "public life" (cf. Apostolic Letter Rosarium Virginis Mariae, n. 19).
It is the season in which Jesus, with the power of his words and actions, fully reveals the "face" of the heavenly Father, inaugurating his Kingdom of love, justice and peace. The Baptism in the Jordan, the wedding at Cana, the proclamation of the Kingdom, the Transfiguration on Mount Tabor and the institution of the Eucharist are all moments of revelation: "luminous" mysteries, precisely, that are radiant with the splendour of the divine nature of God in Jesus Christ.
2. In these mysteries, Mary is present mainly in the background except in one of them, the wedding at Cana, where the "Mother of Jesus" has a crucial role. Indeed, it is she who indicates to the Son that the wine has run out; and when he replies that "his hour" has not yet come, she prompts him with maternal urgency, saying to the servants: "Do whatever he tells you" (Jn 2: 5). In this way she shows that she has more insight than anyone into the profound intentions of Jesus. She knows him "heart to heart", for from the outset she has cherished and pondered on his every act and his every word (cf. Lk 2: 19, 51). This is why the Virgin is the first and most important teacher of Christian prayer: at her school we learn to contemplate the face of the Lord, to internalize his sentiments and to accept his values with generous coherence.
3. Dear brothers and sisters, let us follow Christ on the journey of his mysteries of salvation with the burning love of the Virgin Mary. In these last weeks of the Year of the Rosary, let us feel more closely united than ever as we recite the holy Rosary for families, and particularly for peace in the world.
After the prayer of the Angelus the Holy Father greeted the faithful in French, English, Spanish, German and Italian. In English he said:
I am pleased to greet the English-speaking visitors who have prayed the Angelus with us today. In a special way, on the occasion of the upcoming World Maritime Day, I wish to extend my cordial greetings to Seafarers of all nations. May God bless you in your work, and may Our Lady, Star of the Sea, guide and protect you and your loved ones.
    © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
APOSTOLIC JOURNEY
OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL II
TO THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC
ANGELUS
Bratislava, Esplanade of Petržalka
Sunday, 14 September 2003
  1. At the conclusion of the celebration we wish once again to place ourselves spiritually at the foot of the Cross of Christ and receive from him the sublime gift of his Mother, who from that moment also became the Mother of the Church.
Like the Apostle John, we too welcome her into our home (cf. Jn 19:27), to learn from her the interior disposition of listening and that attitude of humble generosity in service, which characterise her as the first disciple of the Lord.
Together with the new Blesseds, let us ask Mary to intercede for us so as to obtain for the Christian community that lives in Slovakia the grace of being a Church rich in holiness, courageous in doing good and strong in witness.
Hungarian:
I greet with affection the Hungarian-speaking faithful. May the Lord Jesus, who on the Cross gave his life for all, grant you abundance of grace and sustain you with the gifts of his Spirit. I impart to all of you my Blessing.
German:
I extend to the German-speaking pilgrims, especially those from Austria, my affectionate greeting and my blessing. I wish you joy and peace in the Lord.
Ukrainian:
I greet those who have come from the Ukraine, with memories of my apostolic visit to that beautiful country.  I wish you the peace of God which surpasses all understanding (cf. Phil 4:7). I willingly impart my Apostolic Blessing.
Czech:
I greet the faithful from the Czech Republic and as I entrust you to the intercession of Saints Cyril and Methodius venerated at Velehrad, I assure you of a remembrance in my prayers and my affectionate Blessing.
Polish:
On the day of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross, let us commemorate with especial intensity the love of Christ who died for the salvation of the world.  May the experience of this love be with us always.  I bless you with all my heart.
Italian:
To the Italians here present, I send my greetings and my blessing.  May the Virgin Mary guide you in your encounter with Jesus and help you experience the joy and the fruitfulness of his friendship.
Slovakian:
Tomorrow, we will celebrate Our Lady of Sorrows, Patroness of your Land.  Let us turn towards her confidently as we pray together:  Angelus Domini…
After the Angelus:
Before departing from you I wish to renew to all of you my heartfelt gratitude: to the Christian community of Slovakia and to its Pastors, to the President of the Republic and to the civil and military authorities, to the security personnel and to the press corps. To all those who in various ways have contributed to the success of my apostolic journey, I say with all my heart: "thank you!" I carry with me beautiful images of the Eucharistic Celebrations and the different encounters of these days. They are memories that evoke in my spirit profound and comforting emotions.
I wish to send from this esplanade a special greeting, full of affection, to the young people of Slovakia. Dear young friends, you are the hope of the Church and of society; you are the hope of the Pope! Do not be afraid to become true friends of Jesus. Learn from him how to love this world properly and you will build with his help the civilization of love.
I leave you all with the assurance of my thought and my prayers. And my recommendation: keep on being faithful to Christ and to his Church!
Thank you Slovakia! May Almighty God bless you and keep you in his love.
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 7 September 2003
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. In exactly a month, on 7 October, I count on going, please God, to the Shrine of Pompei. It will be a particularly significant moment in the Year of the Rosary, inaugurated last 16 October with the signing in St Peter's Square of my Apostolic Letter Rosarium Virginis Mariae. Today I would like to begin a pilgrimage in spirit to that famous Marian shrine, the centre of the spirituality of the Rosary, contemplating with Mary the face of Christ in his joyful, "luminous", sorrowful and glorious mysteries.
The liturgical feast of the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin that occurs tomorrow, 8 September, is an especially favourable one for setting out on this spiritual itinerary. Her birth, in fact, is a sort of "prologue" to the Incarnation: Mary, like the dawn, ushers in the sun of the "new day", foretelling the joy of the Redeemer.
2. The joyful mysteries lead us to contemplate the joy "radiating from the event of the Incarnation" (Rosarium Virginis Mariae, n. 20):  a joy that does not overlook the drama of the human condition but flows from the awareness that "the Lord is at hand" (cf. Phil 4: 5); indeed, he is "God-with-us" (Mt 1: 23; cf. Is 7: 14).
"Rejoice"! The Angel's joyful greeting casts a beam of light on all five of the joyful mysteries. Through them "Mary leads us to discover the secret of Christian joy, reminding us that Christianity is, first and foremost, euangelion, "good news", whose heart and entire content is the person of Jesus Christ" (Rosarium Virginis Mariae, n. 20).
3. May the Virgin Mary help the Christian people to rediscover the Holy Rosary as a simple yet very profound prayer. Properly recited, it is an introduction into the living experience of the divine mystery and procures for hearts, families and the whole community that peace which we so greatly need.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims in various languages. To the English-speaking pilgrims he said: 
I warmly greet the English-speaking visitors present at this "Angelus" prayer. May Almighty God continue to bless all of you with peace and joy.
  © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 31 August 2003
  Dear Brother and Sisters,
1. In the past Sundays, my reflection has focused on Europe and its Christian roots, reviewing the text of the Post-Synodal Apostolic Exhortation Ecclesia in Europa. This document ends with an "Entrustment to Mary" of all the men and women of the continent, an entrustment I wish to renew today, so that the Holy Virgin may make Europe a concert of nations committed to building together the civilization of love and peace!
2. In every European country, there are numerous Marian Shrines. In particular, my thoughts today go to the Shrine of Our Lady of Tears in Syracuse, where the 50th anniversary of Mary's lacrimation is being celebrated. I greet with great affection the Archbishop and the community of Syracuse, which precisely tomorrow, 1 September, will solemnly conclude the extraordinary Marian Year proclaimed to commemorate such an amazing event. I greet the many pilgrims who have come from Sicily and from many parts of Italy and the world to venerate "Our Lady of Tears". I greet the group of pilgrims from Syracuse who have brought with them a gold crown to be blessed and to be placed on the Virgin's head.
I remain in devout contemplation before the precious reliquary of the Tears of Our Lady which has visited each ecclesial community of Sicily, stirring emotion and spiritual enthusiasm everywhere. How mysterious these tears are! They speak of suffering and tenderness, of comfort and of divine mercy. They are the sign of a maternal presence and an appeal to conversion to God, leaving the ways of evil to follow Jesus Christ faithfully.
3. Gentle Lady of Tears, to you we present the Church and the whole world. Look at those who have the most need of forgiveness and reconciliation; bring harmony to families and peace between peoples.
Dry the tears that hatred and violence have caused in many regions of the earth, especially in the Middle East and the African continent.
May your tears, O Mother, be a pledge of conversion and of peace for all your sons and daughters!
  After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims in various languages. To the English-speaking visitors he said:
I greet the new seminarians of the Pontifical North American College, and I assure you of my prayers for your studies. Upon all the English-speaking pilgrims present today, including the young people from Malta and the University of Dallas, I cordially invoke the grace and peace of our Lord Jesus Christ.
  © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
 JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 24 August 2003
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. My thoughts turn once more to the current process of European integration and especially to the determinant role of its institutions.
I am thinking in the first place of the European Union, involved in seeking new forms of openness, encounter and collaboration between its member States.
I think, moreover, of the Council of Europe, with its headquarters in Strasbourg and of the attached European Court of Human Rights, which carry out the noble task of creating a Europe of freedom, justice and solidarity.
Finally, it is necessary to mention the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe which is committed to promoting the cause of the fundamental freedom of the persons and nations of the continent.
2. I follow in prayer the laborious drafting of the Constitutional Treaty of the European Union, now being studied by the governments of the various countries. I am confident that those who are devoting their energies to it will always be motivated by the conviction that "a proper ordering of society must be rooted in authentic ethical and civil values shared as widely as possible by its citizens" (Apostolic Exhortation Ecclesia in Europa, n. 114).
For her part, the Catholic Church is convinced that the Gospel of Christ, which has been a unifying element of the European peoples for many centuries should be and continue to be today too an inexhaustible source of spirituality and fraternity. Taking note of this is for the benefit of all, and an explicit recognition of the Christian roots of Europe in the Treaty represents the principle guarantee for the continent's future.
3. Let us invoke Mary Most Holy, so that in the building of the Europe of today and tomorrow, that spiritual inspiration which is indispensable to ensure authentic action at the service of humanity, may never be lacking. Such an inspiration finds in the Gospel a sure guarantee in favour of the freedom, justice and peace of all, believers and non-believers.
After the Angelus the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims in French, English, German, Spanish, Portuguese and Italian. To the English-speaking pilgrims he said:
I am pleased to greet the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors present at this Angelus prayer. Upon you and your families I cordially invoke God's blessings of joy and peace.
  © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
 JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 17 August 2003
  1. The day before yesterday, the Solemnity of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary, the Liturgy urged us to turn our gaze towards heaven to contemplate Mary in the new Jerusalem, the Holy City that comes down from God (cf. Apoc 21: 2).
"Behold", says the Lord, "I make all things new" (ibid., 21: 5). The Gospel of hope resounds with vigour in the Apocalypse which urges us to welcome the "newness of God", an eschatological gift which goes beyond all human possibility and which only he can make. This "newness" will be accomplished in full at the end of time but it is already present in history. In fact, even now, God is renewing and transforming the world through the Church, and the effects of his action are perceived "in every form of human coexistence inspired by the Gospel" (Apostolic Exhortation Ecclesia in Europa, n. 107).
2. The European continent that for two millennia "has heard the Gospel of the Kingdom inaugurated by Jesus" (ibid.), cannot but let itself be challenged by this "newness". The Christian faith has given it its shape and some of its fundamental values have subsequently inspired the "democratic ideal and human rights" of modern Europe. Besides being a "geographical area", Europe is "primarily a cultural and historical concept", now defined as a Continent thanks also to the unifying force of Christianity, which has been capable of integrating different peoples and cultures (cf. ibid., n. 108).
It cannot be denied that in our times Europe is going through a crisis of values and it is important that it recover its true identity. The expansion of the European Union and other countries cannot be reduced merely to its geographic and economic dimensions; rather, it must consist in a renewed, accepted set of values which must find expression in its law and in its life (cf. ibid., n. 110).
3. Let us pray to the Holy Virgin, venerated in many European shrines, so that she may help the Continent to be ever more aware of its own spiritual vocation and help to build solidarity and peace "within its borders and throughout the world" (ibid., n. 112).
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims in various languages. To the English-speaking visitors he said:
With affection I greet all the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors present for this Angelus prayer.
May God bless you and your families with his gifts of joy and peace.
    © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
 SOLEMNITY OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN'S ASSUMPTION INTO HEAVEN
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Friday, 15 August 2003
  1. In the heart of the month of August, a time of rest and summer vacation for many, the liturgy celebrates with solemnity the Blessed Virgin's Assumption into Heaven. This is a day of hope and of light, because all men and women, pilgrims on the earth, are able to foresee in Mary the "destiny of glory" that awaits them.
On this day, we contemplate the Handmaid of the Lord in Paradise, encircled in regal radiance, where even in her glorified body she has gone before us. We look to her as a sign of sure hope. Indeed, in Mary, God's promise to the humble and righteous is fulfilled: evil and death will not have the last word.
2. Dear Brothers and Sisters, however dark the shadows that sometimes gather on the horizon and however incomprehensible certain events may appear to be in human history, we must never lose trust and peace. Today's feast invites us to entrust ourselves to Mary Assumed into Heaven who, like a shining star from Heaven, directs our daily journey on earth.
The Virgin indeed, assumed into the Heavenly Jerusalem, "continues her work as our advocate and minister of salvation beside the King of glory" (Preface, Mass of Our Lady of Mercy). Mary helps in understanding that only in her Divine Son can the full sense and value of our life be found. In this way, "hope for the escatological goal" towards which we are "journey[ing] as members of the pilgrim People of God in history" is nourished in us (Apostolic Letter Rosarium Virginis Mariae, n. 23).
3. Virgin Mother of Christ, keep watch over the Church! One day may we also partake in your same glory in Paradise, where "today you were raised above the choirs of angels to lasting glory with Christ" (Opening Antiphon of the Vigil Mass of the Assumption).
Praised be Jesus Christ!
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims in French, English, German, Spanish, Portuguese, Polish and Italian. In English he said:
I am pleased to greet all the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors present at this Angelus prayer. Upon you and your families I cordially invoke God's blessings of joy and peace.
I wish everyone a happy feast of the Assumption.
Praised be Jesus Christ!
  © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
 JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 10 August 2003
  1. To serve the Gospel of hope: this is the Church's mission also in Europe. The Church carries out this mission, accompanying the proclamation of hope with concrete charitable initiatives. Throughout the centuries, this has been the case: the duty of evangelization is sustained by effective human promotion. Putting herself at the service of charity, the Church has nourished and is nourishing the culture of solidarity, cooperating to give life once again to the universal values of human coexistence (cf. Apostolic Exhortation Ecclesia in Europa, n. 84).
2. Today too, it is necessary to "give renewed hope to the poor", so that in welcoming and serving them, it is Christ himself who welcomes and serves (cf. Mt 25: 40). Many challenges in this regard confront European believers. Today, there are many categories of persons who are poor:  among them, the unemployed, the sick, isolated or abandoned elderly persons, the homeless, marginalized youth, immigrants and refugees.
A service of love also means to re-propose faithfully the truth about matrimony and the family, to educate young people, engaged couples and families themselves to live and spread the "Gospel of life", fighting against the "culture of death". Only with everyone's contribution will it be possible to build a "city worthy of man" in Europe and in the world, and a more just and stable international order.
May Mary, Mother of hope, and St Teresa Benedicta of the Cross, co-patroness of Europe whom we commemorated yesterday, help the Church on the European Continent to be a witness of that active charity that "represents the happy synthesis of an authentic service of the Gospel of hope" (ibid., n. 104).
After the prayer of the Angelus, the Holy Father said: 
Extensive fires have developed in these days in certain European nations, with particular intensity in Portugal, and have caused deaths and enormous damage to the environment. It is an emergency that is worrisome and which, fed by the persistent drought as well as human responsibility, puts at risk the environmental patrimony, precious goods for all of humanity.
I invite you to join in my prayer for the victims of this disaster, and I exhort everyone to raise fervent petitions to the Lord so that he showers down a cooling rain on the parched earth.
To the English-speaking faithful he said: 
I warmly welcome the English-speaking pilgrims, and I encourage you to follow Christ with confidence and generosity.
     © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
 JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 3 August 2003
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Europe is the continent which, in the past 2,000 years, has been marked by Christianity more than any other. From all its regions - in its abbeys, cathedrals and churches - ceaseless praise has been raised to Christ, Lord of time and of history. Baptism and the other Sacraments have consecrated the seasons of life of countless believers. The Eucharist, especially on the Lord's Day, has nourished their faith and love; the Liturgy of the Hours and many other popular forms of prayer have marked the rhythm of their daily life.
Even if none of these things has been lacking in our time, a renewed commitment is still indispensable if we are to face the challenges of secularization, so that believers may make their entire life a true spiritual worship that is pleasing to God (cf. Apostolic Exhortation Ecclesia in Europa, n. 69).
2. Special attention should be paid to safeguarding the value of Sunday, Dies Domini. This day is the symbol par excellence of all that Christianity has stood for and still stands for, in Europe and throughout the world:  the perennial proclamation of the Good News of the Resurrection of Jesus, the celebration of his victory over sin and death, the commitment to the human being's full liberation. By preserving the Christian meaning of Sunday a notable contribution is made to Europe for the preservation of an essential part of its own particular spiritual and cultural heritage.
May the Blessed Virgin, to whom so many churches and chapels are dedicated in the different regions of Europe, make her protection felt over all the peoples on the Continent.
After the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims in French, English, German, Spanish, Portuguese, Polish and Italian: 
Dear French-speaking pilgrims, I cordially greet you. During the holidays, may you be more intent on seeking Christ, who wants to dwell with you! With my Apostolic Blessing.
I warmly welcome the English-speaking visitors present at this Angelus. May Almighty God bless you and your families with joy and peace.
I cordially greet the German-speaking pilgrims and visitors. Seek closeness with God also in the vacation period! May Christ's peace accompany you on your way.
I now greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims. I encourage you to use this summer period also to rediscover, with greater intensity, the great mystery of the Eucharist. A good Sunday to all.
I greet with affection the Portuguese-speaking pilgrims and invite you all to live an authentic faith, proclaiming Jesus Christ Our Lord. May God bless you.
I cordially greet the Polish-speaking pilgrims here and those who are joining in this prayer by radio and television. God bless everyone!
I greet the Italian pilgrims present here, and in particular, the community of the diocesan seminary of Florence.
I wish you all every desired good and a peaceful Sunday.
    © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 27 July 2003
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. From the Risen Christ, the Church received the mission to proclaim the Gospel to the very ends of the earth. In these recent Sundays I have had several opportunities to remind the Ecclesial Communities of Europe that they are called to this duty in a particular way. Yes, it is necessary that on this Continent, all believers come to rediscover the evangelical enthusiasm of proclamation and witness.
However, if certain regions and areas are actually awaiting a first proclamation of the Gospel, this proclamation is in need of revival everywhere. Often, in fact, the knowledge of Christianity is taken for granted while, in reality, the Bible is little read and studied, catechesis remains superficial and the Sacraments are widely disregarded. In this way, in place of authentic faith, a vague and non-committal religious sentiment is spreading and running the risk of becoming agnosticism and practical atheism.
2. The Europe of today requires "the presence of Catholics who are adult in their faith and for missionary Christian communities who testify to God's love before all mankind" (Ecclesia in Europa, n. 50).
Such a renewed proclamation of Christ requires that a deep unity and communion within the Church accompany it, along with a sincere effort in the ecumenical field and in dialogue with the followers of the other religions. The Gospel is light that illuminates the whole vast field of social life:  from the family, to culture, from the school and the university, to youth, the mass media, the economy, to politics.... Christ goes to meet men and women wherever they live and work and gives full meaning to their lives.
3. "Church in Europe, enter the new millennium with the Book of the Gospels!" (n. 65). This is the appeal which sprung from the Synodal Assembly of 1999. May every ecclesial Community welcome it with joy thereby becoming, in each sector and as a unit, a believable sign of the message of salvation.
May Mary, the Most Holy Virgin, Mother of the Church and Queen of the Apostles, obtain this for us.
The Holy Father then greeted the pilgrims in French, English, German, Spanish, Portuguese and Italian. To the English-speaking faithful he said: 
I am pleased to greet the English-speaking visitors who have joined us this afternoon in praying the Angelus. Through the intercession of Mary, may you and your families grow ever closer to her Son, Jesus, who is Lord and Saviour of all mankind.
The Holy Father closed saying: 
Lastly, I extend a heartfelt "thank you" to the Mayor and citizens of Castel Gandolfo for their traditional tribute during the Peach festival. I also greet those attending the "Regnum Christi" and wish everyone a pleasant Sunday and a good week.
***
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father referred to the tragic situation in Liberia and asked all to pray for a positive resolution: 
Today's encounter is also a favourable opportunity to demonstrate our solidarity with the brothers and sisters of Africa where, along with positive progress and initiatives for peace, there continue to be deadly troublespots. I especially refer to the tragic news coming from Liberia.
In front of the trials faced by these dear peoples, we can only ask that all those holding a weapon lay it down, to make way once again for the dialogue and concrete action directed by the international Community.
    © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
 JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 20 July 2003
 
Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. In recent months intense work has been done on the draft of the new European Constitution, whose definitive version will be approved by the Intergovernmental Conference beginning next October. The Church is also prompted to make her own contribution to this important task which involves all the members of European society.
She recalls, among other things, what I noted in the Post-Synodal Apostolic Exhortation, Ecclesia in Europa, that "Europe has been widely and profoundly permeated by Christianity" (n. 24). In the complex history of the Continent, Christianity constitutes a central and defining element, established on the firm foundation of the classical heritage and the multiple contributions offered by the various ethnic and cultural streams which have succeeded one another down the centuries.
2. It can certainly be said, therefore, that the Christian faith has shaped the culture of Europe, becoming inextricably bound up with its history and, despite the painful division between East and West, Christianity became "the religion of the European peoples" (ibid.,). It has also had a remarkable influence in modern and contemporary times, regardless of the strong and widespread phenomenon of secularization.
The Church knows that her interest in Europe is inherent in her mission. As the bearer of the Gospel, she has helped to spread those values which have made European culture universal. This heritage cannot be squandered. On the contrary, the new Europe should be helped "to build herself by revitalizing her original Christian roots" (cf. ibid., n. 25).
3. May Mary, Mother of Hope, watch over the Church in Europe so that it may be more and more "transparently open to the Gospel" (ibid., n. 125) and an authentic place for the growth of communion and unity, so that the full brightness of the face of Christ may shine out for the peace and joy of every inhabitant of the European Continent.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father said: 
Today is the centenary of the death of Pope Leo XIII, Vincenzo Gioacchino Pecci. Remembered above all as the Pope of Rerum Novarum, the Encyclical that marked the begining of the modern social teaching of the Church, he developed a broad and articulate Magisterium; in particular, he reintroduced Thomistic studies and encouraged a deeper spiritual life in the Christian people. In this Year of the Rosary, it cannot be forgotten that Leo XIII dedicated 10 Encyclicals to the Rosary. Today let us fervently thank the Lord for this great Pontiff.
Lastly, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims in French, English, German, Spanish, Portuguese and Italian. To the English-speaking faithful he said: 
I am pleased to greet the visitors from the Dante Alighieri Catholic School in Winnipeg, Canada, and all the English-language pilgrims present today. May these summer holidays refresh you both physically and spiritually.
  © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 13 July 2003
    Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. At this time in history when an important process of European reunification is under way with the extension of the European Union to include other countries, the Church turns her loving gaze to the Continent. Beside the many bright spots, shadows are not lacking. A certain loss of Christian memories is accompanied by a sort of fear in facing the future: a widespread fragmentation of life often goes hand in hand with the spread of individualism and a growing weakness in interpersonal solidarity. We are witnessing, as it were, a loss of hope; at its root is the attempt to make a Godless, Christless anthropology prevail. Paradoxically, the cradle of human rights thus risks losing its foundation, eroded by relativism and utilitarianism.
2. In the Post-Synodal Apostolic Exhortation Ecclesia in Europa, which I promulgated this past 28 June, I wanted to take up these urgent and timely themes which were widely discussed at the Synodal Assembly in October 1999.
"Jesus Christ, Alive in his Church, the Source of Hope for Europe": this is the proclamation that believers should never cease to renew, aware of the immense possibilities that the present affords, but at the same time conscious of its "grave uncertainties at the levels of culture, anthropology, ethics and spirituality" (n. 3).
European culture gives the impression of ""a silent apostasy' on the part of people who have all that they need and who live as if God does not exist" (n. 9). The most urgent matter, therefore, that Europe faces "in both East and West, is a growing need for hope, a hope which will enable us to give meaning to life and history and to continue on our way together" (n. 4).
3. But how can we satisfy so deep a longing for hope? We must return to Christ and set out anew from him. "The Church", I wrote in the Exhortation, "has to offer Europe the most precious of all gifts, a gift which no one else can give: faith in Jesus Christ, the source of the hope "that does not disappoint'" (n. 18).
May Mary, the dawn of a new world, watch over the Church in Europe and prepare her to proclaim, celebrate and serve the Gospel of hope.
After praying the Angelus, the Holy Father said the following:
On this first Sunday of my summer holidays I am happy to address a cordial greeting to the inhabitants of Castel Gandolfo. I thank the Bishop of Albano and his Auxiliary, the civil Authorities, the parish Pastor and the other Priests, as well as the Director and personnel of the Pontifical Villas. To them all, my sincere "thank you" for their caring welcome.
Two initiatives for the university world will be taking place in Rome at the end of this week: the first edition of "Sapientiadi", sporting and cultural events to mark the seventh centenary of La Sapienza University; and the Symposium on "The University and the Church in Europe". I am looking forward to meeting the participants next Saturday, and until then, I offer them a cordial welcome.
The Holy Father then greeted the faithful in French, English, German, Spanish, Portuguese, and spoke in Italian to the Sarasit School Band from Thailand. In English he said:
I greet all the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors present at today's Angelus. May your time here at Castel Gandolfo and in Rome be filled with joy and deepen your love of the universal Church.
Upon you all, I invoke the grace and peace of our Lord Jesus Christ. May God bless you all!
  © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
 JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 6 July 2003
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today, 6 July, we conclude the celebration of the 100th anniversary of the death of St Maria Goretti, "little and sweet martyr of purity", as my venerable Predecessor Pius XII defined her. Her mortal remains rest in the Church of Nettuno in the Diocese of Albano, and her beautiful spirit lives in God's glory. What does this fragile but christianly mature girl say to today's young people, through her life and above all through her heroic death? Marietta, as she was lovingly called, reminds the youth of the third millennium that true happiness demands courage and a spirit of sacrifice, refusing every compromise with evil and having the disposition to pay personally, even with death, faithful to God and his commandments.
How timely this message is! Today, pleasure, selfishness and directly immoral actions are often exalted in the name of the false ideals of liberty and happiness. It is essential to reaffirm clearly that purity of heart and of body go together, because chastity "is the custodian" of authentic love.
2. St Maria Goretti helps all young people to experience the beauty and joy of the evangelical Beatitude:  "Blessed are the pure of heart, for they shall see God" (Mt 5: 8).
Purity of heart, as with every virtue, requires a daily discipline of the will and a constant interior discipline. Above all, it calls for assidous recourse to God in prayer.
The many activities and accelerated rhythms of life make it difficult at times to cultivate this important spirutal dimension. Summer vacations, however, that for some begin during these days, can become an appropriate occasion to give new breath to the spiriutal life, if they are not wasted by squandering them and using them simply as entertainment.
3. While I hope to benefit from a summer rest in order to grow spiritually, I entrust the youth to Mary, shining with beauty. She, who sustained Maria Goretti in her trial, helps everyone, especially adolescents and children, to discover the value and importance of chastity in order to build the civilization of love.
After the prayer of the Angelus, the Holy Father said the following: 
In these days, the International Convention on the protection of the rights of migrant workers and their families, adopted by the United Nations Organization in 1990, is coming into force. This legislative instrument signals an important step forward because it considers the migrant as a person together with his family. While I express lively satisfaction at this juridical goal, I hope the States will join in supporting it to make it more effective so that, with the adoption of similar provisions and constant international collaboration, the complex phenomenon of migration can be legally resolved with respect for individuals and families.
To the English-speaking pilgrims
I wish to greet those taking part in the Knanaya Catholic Global Convention. May your meeting be guided by the Holy Spirit's gifts of wisdom and understanding. Upon all the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors present at today's Angelus, I invoke the grace and peace of our Lord Jesus Christ.
The Holy Father also addressed the French-, Polish- and Italian-speaking pilgrims, ending with: "See you in Castel Gandolfo".
    © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Solemnity of the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul
Sunday, 29 June 2003
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. We are celebrating the Solemnity of the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul, whom we venerate today as "pillars" of the Church.
Today, the Diocese of Rome, rooted in the witness of the two great Apostles, is celebrating in a special way. Peter, chosen by Christ as the "rock" on which to build his Church, was crucified not far from the Vatican Hill and his tomb is the symbolic centre of the Catholic faith. Paul, beheaded at the gates of Rome, is a model of evangelization and his Letters, a conspicuous part of the New Testament, never cease to attract to Christ men and women of all times.
I warmly thank those who are assuring the Bishop of Rome, Successor of Peter, of their special prayers on this feast day, and all those who support his service to God's People with their concrete help.
2. Just as I do every year, this afternoon at 6: 00 p.m. I will preside at the solemn celebration of the Eucharist during which I will confer upon many Metropolitan Archbishops the sacred Pallium, a sign of communion with the Apostolic See.
In accordance with what has now become a firm tradition and is a cause of great joy, the Delegation of the Ecumenical Patriarch, His Holiness Bartholomew I, will be present. The exchange of delegations between Rome and Constantinople for their respective patronal feasts is far more than an act of ecclesial courtesy. It reflects the profound and firmly rooted intention to re-establish full communion between East and West. I thank Patriarch Bartholomew who has entrusted the task of representing him to the distinguished members of his Delegation.
3. May the Lord grant us, thanks to these exchanges and strengthened by ceaseless prayer, to achieve the full unity of Christ's disciples as soon as possible.
May Mary protect and guide our Ecclesial Communities so that they may always follow the teaching of the Apostles from whom they received the first proclamation of the faith.
After the prayer of the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
I greet the pilgrims present, particularly the group of families of the Opera della Chiesa (Work of the Church) and the children of the Oratory San Carlo in Macherio (Diocese of Milan). May their visit to the tomb of St Peter be for each one a cause of renewed commitment in fidelity to Christ and to the Church.
Lastly, a cordial greting to all who live in Rome, together with the hope that they will have a peaceful feast of the Holy Patrons of this city. I make the words of the Apostle Paul my own: "Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ" (Rom 1: 7).
A happy feast day and a happy Sunday to everyone.
  © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
APOSTOLIC VOYAGE
OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL II
TO BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
ANGELUS
Banja Luka
Sunday, 22 June 2003
  1. An important source of strength in the life of Blessed Ivan Merz was, along with the Eucharist, his tender devotion to the Mother of the Lord.
At the conclusion of this liturgy, we too lift our eyes to the Virgin Mary and we join the whole Church in repeating the greeting of the Archangel Gabriel and in contemplating the mystery of the Incarnation of the Son of God. We ask Mary to help us "to contemplate the face of Christ and to experience the depths of his love" (Rosarium Virginis Mariae, 1),
2. With affection I greet the German-speaking pilgrims. Through the intercession of the new Blessed, may the Lord make you, like him, strong in faith, firm in hope and fruitful in charity. I cordially bless you.
To you, brothers and sisters of the Hungarian language, go my very cordial greetings and my prayerful good wishes that God’s grace will guide your steps and enlighten your lives. With affection I bless you.
Remembering the commitment of Blessed Ivan Merz to Catholic Action, I greet the Italian-speaking faithful. May his example as a Christian layperson help each of you to respond faithfully to the vocation you have received. I cordially bless all of you.
To the pilgrims from Serbia and Montenegro I offer an affectionate greeting and my blessing. Dear friends, may the intercession of the Mother of the Lord and of Blessed Ivan obtain for you an abundance of divine graces.
I cordially greet the faithful from Croatia, who are honoured to have given the Church a new Blessed. May his example guide you along the paths of the Lord! With my Blessing
3. To the Mother of the Lord I entrust my prayer for all of you and my heartfelt gratitude for the cordial welcome you have given me.
And one final prayer: by her powerful intercession, may the Virgin Mary obtain for you from her Son Jesus the grace of preserving the integrity of your faith, the firmness of your hope and at all times the fervour of your charity.
  JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Solemnity of the Blessed Trinity
Sunday, 15 June 2003
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. This Sunday which follows Pentecost we celebrate the Solemnity of the Blessed Trinity. The Triune nature of God is the principal mystery of the Catholic faith. With it, we come to the end of the journey of revelation which Jesus fulfilled through his Incarnation, Passion, Death and Resurrection. From the summit of the "holy mountain" which is Christ, we contemplate the first and last horizon of the universe and of history: the Love of God, the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit.
God is not solitude, but perfect communion. From God being communion derives the vocation of all humanity to form the one great family in which the various races and cultures meet one another and are reciprocally enriched (cf. Acts 17: 26).
2. In the light of this universal horizon of communion, every situation in which human persons or groups are obliged to flee their own land to seek refuge elsewhere stands out as a serious offence to God. The annual World Day of Refugees that will be celebrated next Friday, 20 June, reminds us of this and invites us to focus this year on the plight of young refugees.
Almost half the refugees in the world are children and young people. Many of them do not go to school, are deprived of basic essentials and live in refugee-camps or even in detention centres.
The dramatic plight of refugees demands that the international community do everything possible not only to treat the symptoms, but first of all to go to the root of the problem: in other words, to prevent conflicts and promote justice and solidarity in every context of the human family.
3. Let us now turn to the Virgin Mary and contemplate her as a wonderful creature of the Blessed Trinity: "the fixed end of eternal counsel", as sung by the supreme poet Dante Alighieri (Par XXXIII, 3). Let us ask her to help the Church, the mystery of communion, always to be a hospitable community where every person, especially if poor or marginalized, may find acceptance and support.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus the Holy Father said:
Once again, there have been days of blood and death for the inhabitants of the Holy Land, caught up in a never-ending spiral of violence and revenge.
I would like to repeat to everyone the appeal I have often made in the past: "There is no peace without justice, no justice without forgiveness". I recall this again today with increased conviction as I address all the inhabitants of the Holy Land.
I then urge the international community not to tire of helping Israelis and Palestinians to rediscover the meaning of man and of brotherhood, in order to weave their future together.
May the Virgin Most Holy intercede for us, so that God may make us "instruments of his peace".
At 7.00 p.m. next Thursday, the Solemnity of Corpus Christi, I will preside at Mass in front of the Basilica of St John Lateran, followed by the traditional procession to St Mary Major. I invite everyone to take part in this celebration in large numbers, to express together faith in Christ, alive and present in the Eucharist.
Lastly, the Holy Father greeted the Spanish-, German- and Italian-speaking pilgrims in their own languages.
  © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
APOSTOLIC JOURNEY
OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL II
TO CROATIA
REGINA CAELI
Solemnity of Pentecost
Rijeka, 8 June 2003
  1. At the conclusion of this solemn celebration, I particularly wish to greet the young people of Croatia. Dear friends, you already know one thing: the Pope looks to you with confidence and hope, and he asks you once more to be sentinels of the dawn and people of the Beatitudes, as I called you at the recent World Youth Day.
Through the family and professional life for which you are now preparing, you will take on great responsibilities for the good of society and the Church. I ask you to remember that human beings are of value for what they are more than what they do or what they possess; that superficial goals will never satisfy the thirst for happiness and fulfilment deep within your hearts; that the mission which Providence has assigned to each of you cannot be carried out by anyone else. Listen to Lord Jesus, follow him as the Teacher of life, make him your Companion along the way.
2. [Greetings in various languages]
Italian:
I greet the Italian-speaking faithful, especially the families who are present among us. May the Spirit of the Lord strengthen you in unity and make you witnesses before the world of God’s faithful and gracious love.
Slovenian:
I offer cordial greetings to the pilgrims from Slovenia. As I recall my visits to your beautiful country, I encourage all of you to be open to the gift of the Holy Spirit, whom the Lord Jesus pours out upon his Church at Pentecost. With my Blessing.
German:
I greet the German-speaking faithful and I pray that the God’s grace will guide your steps along the path of fraternity and peace. I cordially bless all of you.
Albanian:
I offer a particular greeting to the Albanian-speaking pilgrims. May Almighty God grant you abundant his consolation through his gift of the Spirit from on high.
Polish:
With affection I greet my fellow Poles: may the Mother of God guide you towards her Son, and show you the treasures of his Heart. With my blessing.
3. Gathered with the Apostles in the Upper Room, we now turn to Mary and contemplate her as the Mother of the Church, attentive and caring towards all her children. Trusting in her powerful intercession we ask her to obtain for all the people of God docility to the promptings of the Holy Spirit, the strength to show our faith in our actions, and the courage to bear witness to Christ at every moment of our lives:
Regina caeli...
 
  JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CAELI
Solemnity of the Ascension of the Lord
World Day of Social Communications
Sunday, 1 June 2003

Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. In many countries, this is the Sunday on which the Solemnity of the Ascension of the Lord is celebrated. We read in the Gospel that forty days after Easter, Jesus led the Apostles "out as far as Bethany, and lifting up his hands, he blessed them. While he blessed them he parted from them and was carried up into heaven" (Lk 24: 50-51). The Ascension is the final moment of the "Passover" of Christ, which the Evangelist John appropriately describes as a passage "from this world to the Father" (Jn 13: 1).
Jesus wants to bring all humanity to the one heavenly Father. "I am going to prepare a place for you", he said to the disciples during the Last Supper "...that where I am you may be also" (Jn 14: 3). Today's feast kindles in our hearts the desire for Heaven, our eternal homeland.
2. Today is also World Day of Social Communications. Its theme is: "The Communications Media at the Service of Authentic Peace in the Light of "Pacem in Terris'".
Forty years after the publication of Bl. Pope John XXIII's historic Encyclical, it is more important than ever to reflect on the role of the mass media in building a peaceful world based on truth, justice, love and freedom. Indeed, the means of social communication can make a valid contribution to peace, tearing down the barriers of indifference, encouraging reciprocal understanding and respect and, even further, fostering reconciliation and compassion. It is therefore by virtue of their vocation and profession that those who work in the mass media are also called to be peacemakers.
3. May Most Holy Mary, Star of Evangelization, protect and assist all who work in the field of social communications, especially those at the service of the Gospel and of the Church. May Mary, Queen of Heaven, also help us all to live with our gaze fixed constantly on Christ, who today rises triumphant to the glory of Heaven.
After leading the recitation of the Regina Caeli, the Holy Father greeted specific groups of the faithful in French, German and Italian.
    © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CAELI
6th Sunday of Easter, 25 May 2003
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The last week of the month of May begins this Sunday, the sixth in the Season of Easter, and will end next Saturday with the Feast of the Visitation of Mary to St Elizabeth.
In the northern hemisphere, the month of May marks the full reflowering of nature; it is also the season of the paschal "alleluia" which re-echoes throughout the Church a particularly favourable time to offer the new generations the gifts of the risen Christ: Baptism, First Communion, and Confirmation.
In addition, the Novena of Pentecost begins next Thursday with the feast of the Ascension of Christ into Heaven, and Christian communities will be able to relive the original experience of the Upper Room, where with one accord the disciples devoted themselves to prayer with the Mother of Jesus (cf. Acts 1: 14).
2. For the Apostles, Mary's motherly presence reminded them of Christ: her eyes reflected the Saviour's face; her immaculate heart preserved his mysteries, from the Annunciation to the Resurrection and the Ascension into Heaven, through his public life, passion and death.
In this sense one can say that the prayer of the Rosary was born in the Upper Room, because it was here that the first Christians began to contemplate with Mary the face of Christ, recalling the different episodes of his earthly life.
May the Rosary be rediscovered all the more and valued as a Christological and contemplative prayer.
3. I wanted to mention two special prayer intentions for this year, dedicated precisely to the Holy Rosary: the family, whose fundamental principles and values are unfortunately seriously threatened, and peace in the world, with special reference to the Holy Land. May the Lord obtain that despite the fierce violence that is continuing to rage and which offends God and man, the search for just solutions may be intensified and negotiated in order to guarantee to all people serenity and peace.
Let us now turn to Mary, whom we celebrated yesterday as "Help of Christians", with the recitation of the Regina Caeli.
After praying the Regina Caeli, the Holy Father greeted the faithful in English, Spanish, Polish and Italian. To the English-speaking pilgrims, he said:
I am pleased to greet the students from the University of Manitoba in Winnipeg, Canada.
May your studies and your lives always be directed to the praise and glory of God.
Upon all the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors I invoke the grace and peace of our Lord Jesus Christ.
    © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CAELI
V Sunday of Easter, 18 May 2003  
  1. Before concluding this solemn celebration, I address a cordial greeting to you, dear brothers and sisters who have enriched it with your devout and festive participation. I thank the Cardinals and Bishops present, the Priests and the many Women Religious - especially those who belong to the Institutes founded by the new Saints - and all the faithful who come from Italy, Poland and other countries.
I would also like to express deep gratitude to each one of you for the sentiments of affection you have expressed to me today on my birthday. I thank in particular Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger who, while expressing your common sentiments at the beginning of holy Mass, presented good wishes to me on behalf of all. I address a respectful and grateful thought to the Authorities who have wished to be present at this event. I would also like to extend my "thank you" to all who, in so many ways, have conveyed messages of good wishes and attestations of esteem to me. I ask you one and all to continue to pray that God will help me faithfully fulfil the mission he has entrusted to me.
2. I would now like to cordially thank my fellow-countrymen for their presence at this liturgy. I am pleased that our new Saints have brought together so many Poles. May their protection and their intercession always go with you. I invoke this protection and intercession above all for their spiritual daughters: the Sisters Servants of the Most Sacred Heart of Jesus, and the Ursuline Sisters of the Sacred Heart of Jesus in Agony. Dear Sisters, spread devotion to your Founder and your Foundress far and wide, for the glory of God and for the spiritual good of the faithful.
I thank the President and those who have accompanied him for their eloquent presence here today. I greet the Church in Poland with the Primate, and all my compatriots.
I cordially thank you for your kind gifts, and especially for your prayers for my intentions and my service to the Church. May God reward you!
3. Let us now turn to Mary, in spiritual union with the Saints who have just been canonized and always entrusted themselves to her with filial trust. Grateful for the gift of life, today I once again commend to Our Blessed Mother my life and the ministry that Providence has called me to carry out. Dear brothers and sisters, I ask you to support me with your prayers, as I invite you to call upon the Blessed Virgin with the recitation of the Regina Caeli.
    © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CAELI
40th World Day of Prayer for Vocations
IV Sunday of Easter, 11 May 2003
    Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today we are celebrating the 40th World Day of Prayer for Vocations that has as its theme: "Behold my servant whom I have chosen, my beloved with whom my soul is well pleased (Mt 12: 18; cf. Is 42: 1-4). On this important occasion, I have had the joy this morning of ordaining 31 new Priests. Let us thank God for this precious gift to the Church and to the world! I renew my heartfelt greeting to the newly Ordained, and cordially extend it to their relatives and friends, and all who were in charge of their formation.
Let us pray that these new priests, and all the priests of the world, may be ever more closely conformed to Christ, Servant of the Lord, who came not to be served but to serve (cf. Mt 20: 28).
2. I am delighted to address a special greeting to the many young people gathered in the Cathedral of Chieti, where the national celebration of the Day for Vocations is taking place.
Dear friends, by virtue of Baptism and Confirmation, every Christian is called to be a Gospel witness. However, God has always invited some, with a special vocation, to make an even more complete gift of themselves for the cause of the Kingdom. He has certainly turned his gaze also upon the young men and women of today. I urge all who hear his voice resounding in their hearts to give their own generous "yes" to him and then to nourish it daily in prayer, remaining united to Christ like branches to the vine (cf. Jn 15: 5).
My thought also goes to the girls and boys of the schools in Rome who took part this morning in the Spring Marathon - School Celebration. I address an affectionate greeting to you too, dear friends, and to your parents, teachers and professors. May today's celebration help us to understand better the importance of the role that school can play in teaching children to respond generously to God, who calls them to the service of their brothers and sisters.
3. The Virgin Mary is a model of prompt and total allegiance to the divine will. In saying her "Behold", she describes herself as "the handmaid of the Lord" (Lk 1: 38) and made herself fully available to the design of salvation. Let us therefore turn confidently to the Mother of every vocation, praying in particular for all those who received priestly Ordination today.
After praying the Regina Caeli, the Holy Father also greeted the Spanish-, Portuguese- and Italian-speaking pilgrims in their own languages, and addressed a group of Dutch students in Latin.
    © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
APOSTOLIC JOURNEY
OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL II
TO SPAIN
REGINA CAELI
Plaza de Colón, Madrid
Third Sunday of Easter, 4 May 2003
  At the end of this celebration during which I canonized five new Saints, I would like to thank God who enabled me to make my fifth Apostolic Journey to your nation, a land of faithful children of the Church which has produced so many saints and missionaries. The theme of my first visit was: "Witness of hope", and this time it was "You will be my witnesses". Always remember that the badge of Christians is their authentic and courageous witness of Jesus Christ, who died and rose for our salvation.
I would like to repeat my thanks to Their Majesties the King and Queen of Spain and to the Royal Family present here, to the President of the Government and to the Nation's Authorities for their help. I express special gratitude to the Cardinal Archbishop of Madrid and to all the other Bishops of Spain for their invitation and welcome, as well as to everyone who provided a generous service before and during my Visit.
I also greet with deep affection the many priests, the Religious, the many young people, the families and men and women of good will. I am carrying back with me the memory of your faces full of hope, which I encountered in these days, and your commitment to Jesus Christ and his Gospel.
You are the depositaries of a rich spiritual heritage which must revitalize your Christian life, along with your great love for the Church and for the Successor of Peter.
With open arms I will hold you all in my heart. The memory of these days will become my prayer as I ask for peace in fraternal coexistence for you all, encouraged by Christian hope that never disappoints. And I say to you with great affection, as I did the first time, "¡Hasta siempre España! ¡Hasta siempre, tierra de María!".
Thank you for coming here today, you who have come from all parts of the Spanish territory. Even if it cost you a sacrifice, it was worth it.
Today Plaza de Colón has been transformed into a great church in order to accomodate this solemn celebration, during which we prayed with devotion and sang with enthusiasm.
We are meeting in the heart of Madrid, close to important museums, libraries and other centres of culture founded on the Christian faith, which Spain, as a part of Europe, was later able to offer to America with its evangelization and subsequently, to other parts of the world. Thus, the place evokes the vocation of Spanish Catholics to be builders of Europe in solidarity with the rest of the world.
Spain evangelized and evangelizing Spain, this is the way forward. Do not neglect this mission which ennobled your Country in the past and is the bold challenge for the future.
I thank the youth of Spain who came in such large numbers yesterday to show modern society that it is possible to be modern and profoundly faithful to Jesus Christ. They are the great hope of the future of Spain and of Christian Europe. The future belongs to them.... Adiós, Spain!
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CAELI
II Sunday of Easter, 27 April 2003
  1. At the end of this solemn celebration, I would like to greet all of you, dear Brothers and Sisters, who have come here from various parts of Italy and the world in order to honour the new Blesseds and to show your devotion to the Divine Mercy.
I greet in a special way the Cardinals, Bishops and priests who are present, as well as the many sisters and the groups of pilgrims.
Moreover, I greet the priests, Religious and faithful who work at the Spirituality Centre of Divine Mercy, which has now been open for 10 years here in Rome at the Church of the Holy Spirit in Sassia.
To German-speaking pilgrims
2. I extend a cordial welcome to the pilgrims from Austria who have come to Rome on the occasion of the beatification of Fr Mark of Aviano, who was highly honoured in Vienna. May his firm faith and filial love for the Mother of God shine upon men and women. Allow yourselves to be guided by the example of this new Blessed and carry the light of the Resurrection to the world.
To Polish-speaking pilgrims
I greet the group from Catholic Action, the Youth Association KSM and the Choir of the Academy of Music from Poznan. Today we are united in prayer with the Shrine of Divine Mercy in Kraków-Łagiewniki, asking for the grace needed by us and by the entire world. Bl. Mark of Aviano was also part of our history; as the Papal Legate, after the victory of John Sobieski over the Turks at Vienna, he carried the following message from the King to the Pope: Veni, vidi, Deus Vicit! (I came, I saw, God conquered!).
3. The risen Jesus encounters the disciples in the Upper Room and offers them the Easter gifts of peace and mercy. Meditating on today's holy Gospel, it is well to understand that true peace springs from a heart that is reconciled, and that we who have experienced the joy of forgiveness must therefore be ready to pardon. The Church, also absorbed in prayer today spiritually in the Upper Room, presents to our Lord the joys and the hopes, the sorrows and the anguish of the whole world. And he offers as an effective remedy Divine Mercy, asking his ministers to be his generous and faithful instruments.
4. Mary, Queen of the Apostles and of all the Saints, is spiritually present among us, together with the newly Beatified, who show us the road to follow and always put their trust in the help of the Lord. Today I invoke in particular the Mother of Divine Mercy, praying for the entire human family, knowing that only in the mercy of God can the world find peace. We entrust to Mary in a special way the Eastern Church that is celebrating the Easter Resurrection this Sunday.
    © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
  JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CAELI
Easter Monday, 21 April 2003
  1. Easter Monday is called "Monday of the Angel" in memory of what happened at dawn on that first day after Saturday. In fact, it was an Angel that comforted the women who, having hurried to the tomb and found it empty, were bewildered and upset.
"Do not be afraid.... He has risen, he is not here" (Mk 16: 6). And the Angel added: "But go", and announce this news to the Apostles (cf. ibid.).
For us too the Angel's words, which we always hear again with deep emotion, have immense value. Indeed, if Christ is risen, everything changes and life and history acquire new meaning.
2. Today's liturgy proposes for our meditation the Apostle Peter's preaching to the crowds in Jerusalem. It is centred on this announcement: "This is the Jesus God raised up, and of that we all are witnesses" (Acts 2: 32).
Simply and clearly Peter asserts that the crucified Christ is alive, that he has risen, and "of that we all are witnesses". Since then the Church has never ceased to proclaim that same "good news". It is imperative that all people know and encounter Christ, crucified and risen, and that they allow him to win them over. He opens the hearts of all who accept him to that true joy which makes human existence new, beautiful and rich in hope.
3. Regina caeli, laetare, Alleluia! (Queen of Heaven, rejoice, Alleluia!). Mary, the Mother of Christ, who shared with him the harsh trial of the passion, rejoices in particular in the joy of Easter.
May Mary make our faith in the Resurrection of the Lord ever more vibrant, and guide us in our commitment to witness to the joyful and basic message of Easter to the men and women of the third millennium.
Regina caeli....
   © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Palm Sunday, 13 April 2003
18th World Youth Day
  Before concluding this solemn celebration, I greet all of you dear young people who have taken part in it.
In a few minutes a delegation of young Canadians will pass the Cross on to a group of their peers, representing the German dioceses. This is an important act that is part of the journey of preparation for the World Youth Day meeting in Cologne in 2005.
I entrusted this Cross to young people during the Holy Year of 1984. At the end of each pilgrimage, it is received at the San Lorenzo Youth Centre, which is celebrating its 20th anniversary this year. I thank Cardinal Stafford, President of the Pontifical Council for the Laity, and his Staff for the attention they devote to the centre, as well as to the Movements, Associations and Communities that help to run it, coordinated by the Emmanuel Community.
The Cross is now continuing on its pilgrimage: it will first travel through various Central and Eastern European countries; then, after Palm Sunday next year it will visit the Dioceses of Germany on its way to Cologne.
Today I also entrust to the delegation from Germany the Icon of Mary. From now on it will accompany the World Youth Days, together with the Cross. Behold, your Mother! It will be a sign of Mary's motherly presence close to young people who are called, like the Apostle John, to welcome her into their lives.
To French-speaking pilgrims
I greet you joyfully, dear young Canadians, accompanied by Cardinal Aloysius Ambrozic, Archbishop of Toronto; I remember your welcome with emotion. You received the Cross in your country. In contemplating it, you have discovered God's love for you. May you constantly rekindle this spiritual experience in order to live it, to help build the Church in Canada and to be witnesses of the Risen Christ among all young people!
To English-speaking pilgrims
In a special way I welcome the group of young people from Canada, accompanied by the Archbishop of Toronto, Cardinal Aloysius Ambrozic. Two years ago, you received the World Youth Day Cross and carried it back with you to Canada, where it brought many people to a powerful experience of God's love. May the spirit of Toronto remain always alive in your hearts and bear abundant fruit in your lives!
To German-speaking pilgrims
A very warm greeting to the delegation of young people from Germany! Dear representatives of the young Catholics, you have come here on pilgrimage to Rome, led by the Archbishop of Cologne, Cardinal Joachim Meisner, and the Bishop of Meinz, Cardinal Karl Lehmann, in order to receive the World Youth Day Cross. I urge you, dear young brothers and sisters: look at this Cross, draw close to it so that you will recognize the Lord's marvellous love for us and throw yourselves joyfully into his work of renewing hearts!
To Spanish-speaking pilgrims
I cordially greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims who have taken part in the Palm Sunday liturgy, especially the young people. I urge you to welcome into your hearts Mary, the Mother of the Lord and our Mother. May you walk with her, joyfully and full of hope, contemplating Christ through the prayer of the Rosary, as you make your way towards the next World Youth Day in Cologne, Germany. God bless you!
To Polish-speaking pilgrims
I also greet the young people from Poland. May the Cross of Christ direct you on the path of life and in the sometimes difficult choices of life. Let Mother Most Holy be the model of authentic love for you. "Behold, your Mother"!
We entrust to the Heavenly Mother the hopes and the future of young people all over the world.
    © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 6 April 2003
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Forty years ago on 11 April 1963, Bl. John XXIII published the Encyclical Pacem in Terris, in which he sketched the main lines for an effective promotion of peace in the world. Today, too, the Encyclical is proving extraordinarily timely. Building peace is "an ongoing task", as the situation in these days dramatically demonstrates.
My thoughts go in particular to Iraq and to all those involved in the war that is being waged there. I am thinking in a special way of the defenceless civilian population in various cities which is subjected to a harsh trial. Please God that this conflict ends soon in order to make way for a new era of forgiveness, love and peace.
2. To achieve this goal, it is necessary to set out anew in the spirit that motivated my venerable Predecessor: a spirit of faith, first of all, and at the same time of realistic and farsighted wisdom. In the Encyclical, he lists among the "signs of the times" that "men are becoming more and more convinced that disputes which arise between States should not be resolved by recourse to arms, but rather by negotiation" (Part III: n. 126). Unfortunately, this positive goal of civilization has not yet been achieved.
I would like to entrust the commitment to peace especially to young people. I will meet them next Sunday [13 April] on the Day dedicated to them. It is indispensable to educate new generations in the way of peace, which must become more and more a lifestyle which is based - as Pope John teaches - on the "four pillars" of truth, justice, love and freedom. In this regard the World Youth Days are a marvellous way to teach brotherhood, a workshop of peace and of hope for the future of humanity.
3. In preparation for World Youth Day, as is now the tradition, I will meet the young people of Rome and of the Dioceses of Lazio in a special session of prayer and festivity, which will take place next Thursday afternoon, 10 April, in St Peter's Square. In light of the theme "Behold, your Mother!", I will entrust the young people present to the Blessed Virgin and give to each one a Rosary to help them pray.
Let us continue with deep confidence to call on Our Lady, praying for peace in Iraq and in every other part of the world.


© Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
  JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday 30 March 2003
Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today, the Fourth Sunday of Lent, the Gospel reminds us that God "so loved the world that he gave his only Son, so that everyone who believes in him might not perish but might have eternal life" (Jn 3,16).
We hear this comforting proclamation at a time when painful armed confrontation threatens the hope of humanity for a better future. Jesus affirmed "God so loved the world". So then, the Father's love reaches every human being who lives in the world.
How can one not see the obligation that springs from such an initiative of God? Conscious of such great love, the human being can only open himself to an attitude of fraternal welcome towards his fellow human beings.
2. God "so loved the world that he gave his only-begotten Son". This is what happened in the sacrifice of Calvary: Christ died and rose for us, sealing with his blood the new and definitive covenant with humanity.
The sacrament of the Eucharist is the perpetual memorial of this supreme witness of love. In it, Jesus, the Bread of life and true "manna", sustains believers on their way through the "desert" of history toward the "Promised Land" of heaven (cf. Jn 6,32-35).
3. I wanted to dedicate to the subject of the Eucharist the Encyclical that, God willing, this Holy Thursday will be signed during the Mass of the Lord's Supper. I will hand it symbolically to the priests in place of the Letter that on that occasion I usually address to them and, through them, to all the People of God.
From this moment on, I entrust to Mary this important document, which recalls the intrinsic value and importance for the Church of the sacrament that Jesus left us as the living memorial of his death, resurrection and of our redemption.
We also turn to Mary to pray for the victims of the conflicts that are taking place. With grief-stricken and confident insistence, let us ask her intercession for peace in Iraq and in every other region of the world.
After the Angelus
I greet the many members of the Focolare Movement who have come from a variety of European nations and are holding their annual meeting at Castel Gandolfo. Beloved, may the prayer of the Rosary always sustain your dedication to the Church and to society.
   © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
  CAPPELLA PAPALE FOR THE BEATIFICATION OF FIVE SERVANTS OF GOD
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
III Sunday of Lent, 23 March 2003
    At the end of this solemn celebration, I desire to greet cordially and thank all the pilgrims who have gathered here to honour the new Blesseds.
To the French-speaking
Dear French-speaking pilgrims, I greet you who have come to Rome for the beatification of Fr Pierre Bonhomme. I especially greet Bishop Gaidon of Cahors, the Sisters of Our Lady of Calvary and the civil authorities who are present. Following the example of the new Blesseds, may you all know how to draw from the Word of God the energy for your daily mission.
To the German-speaking pilgrims
I cordially greet all our friends from Switzerland and Austria, who have come to Rome for the Beatification of Mother Caritas Brader and Doctor Ladislaus Batthyány-Strattmann. In different ways of life, the new Blesseds were wholeheartedly dedicated to the service of God and his commandment of love. May they be for you living examples of faith and witnesses of understanding among peoples.
To Hungarian pilgrims, to pilgrims from Slovakia
I wish to greet cordially the President of the Hungarian Republic, Mr Ferenc Mádl, the members of the Hungarian Bishops' Conference who are here, and the faithful who have traveled from Hungary and Slovakia. May the example of Blessed Ladislaus (László) Batthyány-Strattmann, who prayed the Rosary daily with his family, strengthen you in your veneration of Our Lady.
  Concluding this celebration with the prayer of the Angelus, I wish to greet cordially the Cardinals, Bishops, priests and faithful, and, particularly, the sisters of the Institutes founded by the new Blesseds:  Dolores Rodríguez Sopeña, Juana Condesa Lluch and Caritas Brader, and the civil authorities who have come from several Spanish-speaking countries. Edified by the examples of these extraordinary women, may they learn at the school of Mary to contemplate Jesus Christ, the Prince of Peace, supreme model for every Christian.
We now turn to the Blessed Virgin Mary, whom the new Blesseds loved and honoured with a special devotion. Above all at this time we ask her for the gift of peace. To her especially, we entrust the victims of these hours of war and their families who are suffering. I feel spiritually close to them with my affection and my prayer.
   © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
  JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 16 March 2003  
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Yesterday, our retreat in the Apostolic Palace came to an end. We lived days of intense recollection and listening to the Word of God.
The theme of the meditations that were preached was the central truth of the Christian faith, "God is Love". In the silence of prayer we were able to contemplate at length this Good News, of which the world is always in need. In the face of a humanity marked by serious imbalances and so much violence, we must not lose confidence. Over this world is reflected faithfully and mercifully the love of God, that shines in fullness upon the face of Christ.
2. Only Christ can renew hearts and again give hope to peoples. Today's liturgy, in presenting the mysterious event of the Transfiguration, allows us to experience the power of his light, that overcomes the darkness of doubt and evil.
From this perspective of faith, I wish to renew an urgent appeal to intensify the commitment to prayer and penance, to invoke from Christ the gift of his peace. There is no peace without conversion of heart.
The next few days will be decisive for the outcome of the Iraqi crisis. Let us pray, then, that the Lord inspire in all sides of the dispute courage and farsightedness.
The political leaders of Baghdad certainly have the urgent duty to collaborate fully with the international community to eliminate every reason for armed intervention. To them I direct my urgent appeal:  the fate of your fellow-citizens should always have priority.
But I would also like to remind the member countries of the United Nations, and especially those who make up the Security Council, that the use of force represents the last recourse, after having exhausted every other peaceful solution, in keeping with the well-known principles of the UN Charter.
That is why, in the face of the tremendous consequences that an international military operation would have for the population of Iraq and for the balance of the Middle East region, already sorely tried, and for the extremisms that could stem from it, I say to all:  There is still time to negotiate; there is still room for peace, it is never too late to come to an understanding and to continue discussions.
To reflect on one's duties, to engage in energetic negotiations does not mean to be humiliated, but to work with responsibility for peace.
Moreover, we Christians are convinced that real and lasting peace is not only the fruit of necessary political agreements and understandings between individuals and peoples, but is the gift of God to all those who submit themselves to him and accept with humility and gratitude the light of his love.
I belong to that generation that lived through World War II and, thanks be to God, survived it. I have the duty to say to all young people, to those who are younger than I, who have not had this experience: "No more war" as Paul VI said during his first visit to the United Nations. We must do everything possible. We know well that peace is not possible at any price. But we all know how great is this responsibility. Therefore prayer and penance.
3. Let us go forward confidently, dear Brothers and Sisters, in our Lenten journey. May the Blessed Virgin Mary obtain for us that this Lent may not be remembered as a sad time of war, but as a period of courageous effort for conversion and peace. We entrust this intention to the special intercession of St Jospeh whose Solemnity we will celebrate next Wednesday.
    © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 9 March 2003
    Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Last Wednesday, with the rite of the imposition of ashes, we entered Lent, a penitential journey of preparation for Easter, an occasion for all the baptized to renew the spirit of faith and to reinforce their commitment of evangelical consistency.
As today's Gospel suggests (Mk 1,12-15), during the 40 days of Lent, believers are called to follow Christ in the "desert" to confront and with him defeat the spirit of evil. This is an interior struggle, on which the concrete direction of life depends. In fact, it is from the human heart that evil designs and actions arise (cf. Mk 7,21). For this reason, it is only by purifying the conscience that the path to justice and peace can be prepared on the personal and social level.
2. In the present international context, there is a much stronger need to purify the conscience and convert the heart to true peace. In this regard, how much more eloquent is the image of Christ who exposes and overcomes the lies of Satan with the force of truth contained in the Word of God. In the inner heart of every person the voice of God and the insidious voice of the Evil One can be heard. The latter seeks to deceive the human person, seducing him with the prospect of false goods, to lead him away from the real good that consists precisely in fulfilling the divine will. But humble and confident prayer, reinforced by fasting, allows one to overcome even the harshest trials, and instils the necessary courage to combat evil with good. Thus Lent becomes a profitable time of spiritual training.
3. Dear Brothers and Sisters, let us invoke the Blessed Virgin Mary so that she may direct all of us to go forward with generosity on this demanding Lenten journey. In a special way, I would like to entrust to your prayers the Spiritual Exercises that, beginning this evening as every year, I will have the opportunity to undertake with my close collaborators of the Roman Curia. During this week of silence and prayer, I will keep in mind the needs of the Church and the concern of the whole world for peace in Iraq and in the Holy Land.
After the Angelus
Next Saturday evening at 6: 00 p.m., a Marian Prayer Vigil will take place in the Audience Hall of Paul VI on the occasion of the First European Day of University Students on the theme "Intellectual Charity, Soul of the New Europe". I hope the young university students will participate in great numbers. Together let us call upon Mary as "Seat of Wisdom" and entrust to her the hopes and progress of the European continent.
    © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 2 March 2003
    1. Next Wednesday - Ash Wednesday - we will begin Lent, a time defined by a more acute consciousness of the need for conversion and renewal, during which the faithful are invited to look with greater intensity at Christ who prepares himself to fulfil the supreme sacrifice of the cross.
This year we will undertake the penitential journey toward Easter with a greater commitment to prayer and fasting for peace, that is put at risk by the growing threat of war. Last Sunday, I already announced this initiative whose purpose is to involve the faithful in fervent prayer to Christ, Prince of Peace. Indeed, peace is a gift of God to be invoked with humble and insistent confidence.
Without surrendering before difficulties, it is also necessary to seek and pursue every possible avenue to avoid war, which always brings mourning and serious consequences for all.
2. The liturgy of Ash Wednesday invites us to add fasting to prayer, a penitential practice that calls for a more profound spiritual effort, the conversion of the heart, with the firm decision to turn away from evil and sin, to be better disposed to fulfil the will of God. With physical fasting, and, even more so with interior fasting, the Christian prepares himself to follow Christ and to be his faithful witness in every circumstance. Moreover, fasting helps us to understand better the difficulties and sufferings of so many of our brothers and sisters who are oppressed by hunger, severe poverty and war. In addition, it prompts us to a concrete solidarity and sharing with those who are in need.
3. Dear Brothers and Sisters, let us dispose ourselves to participate intensely in the Day of Prayer and Fasting for Peace, which we will observe next Wednesday. We will pray for peace in the world, in particular, for Iraq and the Holy Land, especially through the recitation of the Rosary, which will involve shrines, parishes, communities and families. From every part of the earth may this collective prayer rise through the intercession of Mary, Mother of Mercy and Queen of Peace.
    © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 23 February 2003
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. For months the international community has been living in great apprehension on account of the danger of a war that might upset the whole Middle East region and aggravate the tensions that, unfortunately, are already present at the beginning of the third millennium. It is a duty for believers, regardless of the religion they belong to, to proclaim that we can never be happy if we are against one another, the future of humanity can never be assured by terrorism and the logic of war.
We Christians, especially, are called to be sentinels of peace wherever we live and work. We are asked to watch out so that consciences may not yield to the temptation to egoism, lying and violence.
2. Therefore, I invite all Catholics to dedicate with special intensity next 5 March, Ash Wednesday, to prayer and fasting for the cause of peace, especially in the Middle East.
Above all, let us ask God for the conversion of hearts and the farsightedness of just decisions to resolve with adequate and peaceful means the conflicts that impede the pilgrimage of humanity in our time.
In every Marian shrine an ardent prayer for peace will be raised to heaven with the prayer of the Rosary. I trust that also in parishes and in families the Rosary will be prayed for this great cause on which the good of all depends.
This common invocation will be accompanied by fasting, the expression of penance for the hatred and violence that poison human relations. Christians share the ancient practice of fasting with so many brothers and sisters of other religions, who in this way want to shed all pride and prepare themselves to receive from God the greatest and most necessary gifts, among which, in particular, is that of peace.
3. From now on, we invoke on this initiative, which is placed at the beginning of Lent, the special assistance of the Blessed Virgin Mary, Queen of Peace. Through her intercession, may the evangelical beatitude "Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called sons of God" (Mt 5,9) resound with new force in the world and find concrete acceptance.
After the Angelus
I also greet the Italian members of the Ingrid Betancourt Pro-Peace Association, with the hope that all the persons kidnapped in Colombia may soon be released.
  © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 16 February 2003
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Last Friday, 14 February, we celebrated the feast of Sts Cyril and Methodius, apostles of the Slavs and co-patrons of Europe. Born at Salonika in the first half of the ninth century, and formed in the Byzantine culture, the two brothers courageously took up the mission of evangelizing the Slav peoples of Greater Moravia at the heart of Europe.
A central feature of their apostolate was their maintaining fidelity to the Roman Pontiff and to the Patriarch of Constantinople, while respecting the traditions and language of the Slav peoples. They were inspired by a profound sense of the one, holy, catholic and apostolic Church while the prayer of Jesus "that they may be one" (Jn 17,11) was their missionary slogan. May their example and intercession help the Christians of the East and of the West to re-establish their full unity (cf. Encyclical Epistle Slavorum Apostoli, n. 13: AAS 77[1985], 794-795).
2. The heritage of Sts Cyril and Methodius is valuable from the cultural point of view. In fact, their work contributed to consolidating the common Christian roots of Europe, roots that with their rich sap enriched European history and institutions.
For this very reason, it has been asked that in the future Constitutional Treaty of the European Union there be room for the common patrimony of the East and of the West. Such a reference would take nothing away from the appropriate secular character of the political structures (cf. Lumen gentium, n. 36; Gaudium et spes, nn. 36, 76), but, on the contrary, would help to preserve the continent from the double risk of ideological secularism and sectarian fundamentalism.
3. United by their values and their histories, European peoples can fully carry out their role in the promotion of justice and peace in the whole world. To this end, let us pray to the Blessed Virgin Mary and the holy Patrons of Europe.
After the Angelus
I am pleased to greet the Schola Cantorum of St Philip's Preparatory School in London. May your music and your lives always be directed to the praise of God and the growth of his Kingdom.
Upon all the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors, I invoke the grace and peace of Our Lord Jesus Christ.
    © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 9 February 2003
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. On 11 February, the liturgical memorial of Our Lady of Lourdes, the World Day of the Sick will be observed. It is an important occasion, that helps the ecclesial communities to keep alive their concern for their sick and suffering brothers and sisters, and encourages health care workers to perform their professional service with unfailing dedication.
The fact that this observance coincides with the date of the apparition of Our Lady at Lourdes makes that place consecrated by the presence of Mary, the constant reference point for the Day of the Sick. From the grotto of Massabielle, Mary does not fail to direct to the world of the suffering a consoling message of confidence and hope.
2. As is well known, the main celebrations of the Day will take place in the majestic National Shrine of the Immaculate Conception in Washington, capital of the United States of America. I express heartfelt gratitude to those who have organized the different events of this important ecclesial realization.
I express my appreciation to the doctors and nurses, social assistants, volunteers, priests, men and women religious who work in the vast field of assistance to the sick. May the Day of the Sick renew in each one the desire to serve with dedication those who suffer, imitating Jesus, the Good Samaritan of humanity.
3. At this time of international concern, we all feel the need to turn to the Lord to implore the great gift of peace. As I pointed out in the Apostolic Letter, On the Most Holy Rosary, "the grave challenges confronting the world at the start of this new millennium lead us to think that only an intervention from on high ... can give reason to hope for a brighter future" (n. 40). Many prayer initiatives are taking place these days all over the world. While I endorse them wholeheartedly, I invite all to take up the Rosary to ask the intercession of the Blessed Virgin Mary:  "One cannot recite the Rosary without feeling caught up in a clear commitment to advancing peace" (same place, n. 6).
    © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Feast of the Presentation of Jesus in the Temple
Sunday, 2 February 2003
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today Italy observes a Pro-Life Day that has as its theme: "You Cannot Trade with Life".
This principle, although admitted theoretically, unfortunately is not always respected. There are situations in which the human person becomes an instrument for economic, political and scientific interests, especially when he is weak and does not have the strength to defend himself.
Moreover, a certain commercial logic, linked with modern technology, can at times take advantage of human desires that are good in themselves, such as that of becoming mother or father, to the point of wanting a child "at any cost".
In reality, human life can never become an "object": from conception until natural death, the human being is the subject of inviolable rights, which freedom must learn to respect. For this reason, in these complicated matters, it is indispensable that states adopt organic and clear laws, founded on solid ethical bases, to safeguard the inestimable good of human life.
2. For ten years now, the Pro-Life Day continues in the diocese of Rome through a special week dedicated to Life and the Family. Also, next June the diocesan ecclesial meeting will be dedicated to this topic. I reaffirm for the families of Rome the message that was repeated at the World Meeting that ended a short time ago in Manila. Dear Christian families, you are "good news" for our city. Sustained by the grace of the Sacrament of Matrimony, confront in a united way the various situations of life and contribute to keeping the social fabric sound.
3. Today, on the Feast of the Presentation of Jesus in the Temple, we entrust to Mary all those dedicated to the defence of life and the families who are the natural "nest" of life. May Our Lady watch over those who are occupied with the service of the sick, for whom on 11 February we observe the World Day of the Sick. Finally, may the Blessed Virgin Mary protect in a special way the men and women religious and consecrated laity who observe today the "Day of Consecrated Life".
After the Angelus:
The sad news of the tragic explosion of the United States space shuttle "Columbia" on its re-entry into the atmosphere has caused great distress to everyone. I invite all to pray for the victims of the accident who died while accomplishing an international scientific mission. At this time of severe trial, I am spiritually close to the relatives to whom I offer the assurance of my prayer.
Once again, my thoughts turn to the Ivory Coast, tried by a serious crisis that affects the people. Let us pray that, beyond the divisions and counter-claims, the efforts of those who have at heart the unity of the country and respect for legality may prevail. May the Catholic faithful led by their Pastors know how to act so that dialogue and respect for persons and their property may be practiced and promoted by all.
May Our Lady of Peace of Yamoussoukro, intercede for reconciliation and concern among the people of that beloved nation.
Yesterday, the first of February, the Lunar New Year was observed by many millions of persons, especially the Chinese, Vietnamese and Koreans, who live this holiday in the intimacy of their family. To them I repeat the greetings that I formulated in the Message for the recent World Day of Peace: may the new year be a time of peace, founded on the "four basic requirements of the human spirit: truth, justice, love and freedom". May my affectionate greetings reach the heart of each of them. My prayer accompanies them every day.
  © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 26 January 2003 
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. In these last days the 4th World Meeting of Families was held in Manila, the capital of the Philippines, and it was concluded a few hours ago with a solemn Eucharistic celebration by Cardinal Alfonso López Trujillo, President of the Pontifical Council for the Family, and my Legate for such an important ecclesial event.
The theme of the Meeting is important: "The Christian Family: Good News for the Third Millennium". Yes. The faithful and fruitful union of man and woman, blessed by the grace of Christ, is a genuine Gospel of life and hope for humanity. This joyful message was proclaimed, together with so many Philippine families, by the thousands of families of every race and nation, gathered in Manila for such an important religious meeting. Together they renewed their dedication to being exponents of the new evangelization.
2. "The future of humanity passes by way of the family" I wrote in the Apostolic Exhortation "Familiaris consortio" (n. 86). This affirmation is more important than ever. But, what family is it referring to? Certainly not the inauthentic one based on individual egotisms. Experience show such a "caricature" of the family has no future and cannot ensure the future of any society.
Instead, the family is "good news" to the extent to which it accepts and makes its own the perennial vocation that God gave it at the beginning of humanity. Thanks be to God, this original plan of life is also shared by many non-Christian couples. Thus in our day the family appears as the privileged way of dialogue among different religions and cultures, and of reconciliation and peace.
3. We entrust to the Blessed Virgin Mary, Queen of the family, the spiritual fruit of the great gathering in Manila, and, already from now on, the next world meeting of families, that will be held in 2006 in Valencia, Spain.
Let us pray that every family, an authentic "domestic church", "good news" of love and life, also be a sign of hope for the ecclesial community and for the whole world.
After the Angelus:
Today we observe the World Day of those Sick with Leprosy, that has now reached its 50th observance. This year we mark the centenary of the birth of its famous originator, Raoul Follereau, whose name is forever linked with the struggle against leprosy, severe poverty and marginalization.
How timely is his appeal, inviting the world to allocate resources not to arsenals for war but to combat severe poverty and illness. I feel close to the brothers and sisters who unfortunately still continue to suffer from Hansen's disease. And I encourage the multiplication of initiatives to wipe it out both at the level of health care and at the level of society.
    © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 19 January 2003
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Yesterday we began the "Week of Prayer for Christian Unity" which is observed every year from 18 to 25 January and, in the Southern Hemisphere, around Pentecost. The intentions for this "Week" were prepared by a mixed international commission, made up of Catholic representatives and of the "Faith and Order" Commission of the World Council of Churches.
This year the theme is "We have this treasure in earthen vessels" taken from the Second Letter of St Paul to the Corinthians (cf. 4,7). In our hearts shines the vision of the divine glory that shines on the face of Christ. However, we bear this treasure "in earthen vessels", namely, in the frailty of the human condition, "to show that the transcendent power belongs to God and not to us" (II Cor 4,7).
The recomposition of the unity of all the baptized is a gift that comes from God and our dedication to promoting it is not by itself sufficient to realize it, but, when Christians come together, discover they are brothers, collaborate to relieve suffering and pray for unity, they contribute to making shine forth the face of Christ and his glory.
2. On the second day of the "Week of Prayer", the verse suggested for our meditation is drawn from the text of the Apostle and says, "We are afflicted in every way, but not crushed" (II Cor 4,8). Yes, we are oppressed by division and there are many barriers that still separate us. But we are not crushed because the glory of the Lord, that shines upon us, continues to guide us toward purification and reciprocal pardon, and gives light and force to the common prayer that we offer together to God so that he might heal the wounds of our division.
3. Dear Brothers and Sisters, let us ask the Lord that he may make grow to its fullness the communion between Christians in truth and in charity. Let this be our common aspiration. At the closing of the Week, on 25 January, we will solemnly renew it together when I will preside at the celebration of Vespers in the Basilica of St Paul Outside the Walls, where events of great importance connected with the ecumenical journey have taken place.
Let us entrust this ardent prayer to the intercession of Our Lady, Mother of the Church.
After the Angelus the Holy Father spoke on the initiative "Catholic Schools Day" organized by the diocese of Rome that brought a crowd into St Peter's Square:
I greet the directors, teachers, parents and students of the Catholic schools of Rome who have gathered for the observance of "Catholic Schools Day", that has the theme "Family, School, Community. Together to educate for life". It is a wonderful chance to reflect on the original plan of formation, inspired by the Gospel, and by the integral vision of the human person that the school offers children to help them in a positive way think through the great questions of life.
While I thank all those who live and work in Catholic schools, I also strongly hope that every family may have the concrete possibility to choose this kind of school for their children. I express my appreciation for the quality of service they render and for the tenacity and spirit of sacrifice with which they face the difficulties. I encourage all to persevere in this valuable mission that is an integral part of the diocesan pastoral programme that deals with vocations.
  © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Feast of the Baptism of the Lord
Sunday, 12 January 2003
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today, the season of Christmas and of the Epiphany comes to an end with the Feast of the Baptism of the Lord in the Jordan River. The Gospels agree in attesting that, when Jesus came up out of the water, the Holy Spirit rested upon him in the form of a dove, and the voice of the heavenly Father was heard coming from on high, saying, "You are my beloved Son, in you I am well pleased" (Mk 1,11).
Not standing out among the crowd of penitents, Jesus asked John the Baptist to be baptized, leaving the Precursor bewildered. But it is this gesture that reveals the unique character of Jesus' Messianic activity: it consists in doing the will of the Father, becoming the "victim of expiation for our sins" (I Jn 4,10).
His humble solidarity with sinners will lead him to his death on the Cross.
2. Immersion into the death and resurrection of Christ radically frees the human being from sin and death, and realizes a new birth according to the Spirit, for a life that will never end. This is the Baptism that the Risen One entrusts to the Apostles when he sends them into the whole world (cf. Mt 28,19). This morning, according to custom, I had the joy of administering the same Baptism to some newborns.
The Baptism of infants, so dear to the Christian tradition, makes us understand with immediate force the true nature of salvation. It is a grace, namely, the free gift of the Lord.
Indeed, God always loves us first and, with the blood of his Son, has already paid the price of our redemption.
For this reason it is good to urge Christian parents to bring their children to the Baptismal fount so that they may receive, in virtue of the faith of the Church, the great gift of divine life. Then, their parents, by their example, prayer and teaching, should be the first teachers of the faith of their children, so that the seed of new life may reach its full maturity.
3. Turning now to the Blessed Virgin Mary, let us pray for the twenty-two infants who received Baptism this morning. Let us also pray for their parents, their godparents, and for every Christian.
May the Mother of the Lord help all the baptized to reject what is contrary to the Gospel and to remain ever faithful to the promises made at the Baptismal fount.
    © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Monday, 6 January 2003
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today, on the Solemnity of the Epiphany of the Lord, the Child born in the night of Bethlehem is manifested to the world as the light of salvation for all peoples. The Gospel of St Matthew narrates that several Magi came from the East, adored the Child and offered him symbolic gifts: gold for a king, incense for God, and myrrh for the man who will be buried.
To this episode, the Fathers of the Church associated two others in which Jesus manifested his glory: his Baptism in the River Jordan, and the Wedding at Cana.
These two events of Christ's life are part of the new cycle of the mysteries of the Rosary - the mysteries of light - which I recently suggested for the meditation of all the faithful. For this reason, with Mary's gaze, we contemplate these mysteries of the Epiphany of the Lord, light and salvation of the world.
2. In today's solemnity emerges the universal and missionary vocation of the Church. She is called to spread throughout the world the light of the Good News, a source of life and renewal for every person and for humanity. This is, especially, the mission of the Apostles and of their successors, the Bishops: this morning, therefore, as in the past, I ordained new Bishops. I renew my cordial greeting to them with their relatives and those who accompany them. I ask everyone to pray for them that they may always be an "epiphany" of Christ, the Way, the Truth and the Life.
3. The Gospel tells us that a star guided the Magi to Jerusalem and then on to Bethlehem. The ancient prophecies compared the future Messiah to a heavenly star. This emblem has also been attributed to Mary: if Christ is the star that leads to God, Mary is the star that leads to Jesus.
Today let us entrust to her motherly protection the new Bishops and the entire Christian people.
I ask you to pray especially for our beloved brothers and sisters of the Eastern Churches, who follow the Julian Calendar and so are celebrating Christmas these days. To all these ecclesial communities may the Lord who was born for us of the Virgin Mother, bring serenity and peace.
After the Angelus:
This year is the 160th anniversary of the Pontifical Society of the Holy Childhood, present today in more than 100 nations. It teaches children to pray and make gestures of concrete solidarity, even with a personal sacrifice, for the benefit of their peers who do not yet know Jesus and live in situations of hardship. I thank all these "little missionaries" for their contribution to spreading the Gospel and hope that they will be able to witness to it every day with their lives.
May the light of Christ enlighten everyone everyday of the new year that we have just begun.
    © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 5 January 2003 
  1. In the prologue to the Gospel of St John, the liturgy today re-presents to us the sublime mystery of the Incarnation of the eternal Word who came to dwell among us.
The Evangelist writes: "In him was life and the life was the light of men" who "shines in the darkness, and the darkness has not overcome it" (Jn 1,4-5). To those who received him, however, he gave "power to become children of God" (cf. v. 12). And he concludes with this solemn affirmation: "No one has ever seen God; the only Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he has made him known" (v. 18).
Although these words have re-echoed in the heart of the Church for more than 2,000 years, they have kept all their newness and timeliness. In Jesus, the Only Son of the Father, God makes himself fully known and shares his life with every human being who recognizes him as Saviour. The Child born in Bethlehem who comes on the face of the earth is truly "contemporary" with every person who lives on the face of the earth.
2. For this reason, he is also our "contemporary". The gifts of the Lord never become obsolete. Here are the glad tidings of Christmas: the divine light which filled the hearts of Mary and Joseph and guided the steps of the shepherds and Magi, still shines for us today.
The tragedy is that Christ, the Light of the world, is unknown to many, by others he is not accepted or even rejected. In our society, unfortunately there is a widespread culture imbued with selfishness and closed to the knowledge and love of God. This culture, by refusing de facto a sound reference to divine transcendence, gives rise to confusion, dissatisfaction, indifference, loneliness, hatred and violence. How urgent it is then to offer a joyful witness to the one message of salvation, ancient and ever new, of the Gospel of life and light, of hope and love!
3. May Mary, Star of evangelization whom we call upon with confidence, always sustain us so that we may remain faithful to our Christian vocation and achieve the aspirations of justice and peace which we feel so strongly at the beginning of this new year.
After the Angelus
I greet those who are taking part in two historic and folkloric processions: the one called "Terra Sancti Benedicti" which has come from Montecassino and is inspired by the figure of Abbot St Benedict, and that of the "Three Kings" from Giulianello di Cori where a venerated small statue of the Child Jesus is preserved.
    © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Wednesday, 1 January 2003
  1. At the beginning of the New Year, let us raise to the Lord our heartfelt thanks for the "new" time, a gift of his merciful love, which we begin in the name of Jesus and of his Virgin Mother, Mary.
Indeed, today, the eighth day of the Solemnity of Christmas, we celebrate the feast of the divine motherhood of Our Lady, and the Gospel reminds us that to the Child born in the grotto of Bethlehem "the name Jesus was given" (Lk 2,21), which means "God saves".
Yes! Only from the Lord can the world expect salvation. Only Christ knows the depths of the human heart: by receiving the power of his grace, each one can fully realize himself.
2. Supported by this consciousness, believers do not lose hope, despite the growing number of obstacles to, and attacks on peace. Forty years ago, in a moment of serious threat to world security, with great courage, Bl. John XXIII published the Encyclical Pacem in terris.
I wished to refer to this significant event in the Message for today's World Day of Peace. So today I ask each person to make his/her contribution to foster and bring about peace, through generous choices of reciprocal understanding, reconciliation, forgiveness and concrete attention to those in need. Concrete "gestures of peace" are necessary in families, in the work place, in communities, in civil life as a whole, in national and international public gatherings. Above all, we must never stop praying for peace.
How can we not express once more the wish that world leaders do everything in their power to find peaceful solutions to the many tensions present in the world, especially in the Middle East, avoiding further suffering for those peoples who have been so sorely tried? May human solidarity and law prevail!
3. Dear brothers and sisters, let us entrust this unceasing plea to Mary, whom we venerate today with the wonderful title of "Mother of God", the Theotokos. Chosen to be the Mother of our Saviour, at the foot of the Cross she became the Mother of every human being.
May she obtain for us a serene and profitable year in which people may accomplish many "gestures of peace" that always assume a prophetic character, that is, the humility of one who works unobtrusively to proclaim the great ideal of peace (cf. Message for the World Day of Peace, 1 January 2003, n. 9).
After the Angelus
To all the English-speaking visitors and pilgrims I offer cordial good wishes for a New Year filled with God's blessings of joy and peace. On this feast of the Mother of God, I commend you and your families to Mary's loving intercession. Happy New Year!
I greet the Italian-speaking pilgrims, especially those who are taking part in the peace march promoted by the Community of Sant'Egidio. May the motto of this initiative - "Peace in all countries" - always be the inspiration of every believer!
I greet with special affection the young members of the Don Orione Work who last night, as every year observed a prayer vigil for peace in St Peter's Square.
I hope that 2003 will be a time of growth in good will, brotherhood and in everything good. Happy New Year!
    © Copyright 2003 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
SOLEMNITY OF THE HOLY FAMILY
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 26 December 2004
1. Today, the Feast of St Stephen gives way to the Feast of the Holy Family. The Son of God prepared himself to carry out his redeeming mission, living a hard-working and hidden life in the holy house of Nazareth. Thus, united by his Incarnation with every man and woman (cf. Gaudium et Spes, n. 22), he was able to sanctify human families.

2. May the Holy Family, which had to endure many painful trials, watch over all the families of the world, especially those in conditions of hardship. May it likewise help the people of culture and political leaders to defend the family institution founded on marriage and to support families as they face the serious challenges of our time.

3. In this "Year of the Eucharist", may Christian families rediscover the light and strength to journey on in unity and especially, through persevering participation in the celebration of the Sunday Eucharist, to develop as "domestic churches" (Lumen Gentium, n. 11). Mary, Queen of the Family, pray for us!
After the Angelus:

The Christmas Feast has been saddened by the news from Southeast Asia of the violent seaquake that has struck Indonesia with consequences in other Countries such as Sri Lanka, India, Bangladesh, Myanmar, Thailand, Malaysia, and the Maldives.

Let us pray for the victims of this terrible tragedy and assure all who are suffering of our solidarity, as we express the hope that the international community will do all it can to bring relief to the affected populations.
    © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Fourth Sunday of Advent, 19 December 2004

  1. The Feast of Christmas, perhaps the dearest to popular tradition, is full of symbols connected with the different cultures. There is no doubt that the most important of them all is the crib, as I had occasion to emphasize last Sunday.
2. Next to the crib, as in St Peter's Square, we find the traditional "Christmas tree". This too is an ancient tradition that exalts the value of life, for in the winter season the evergreen fir becomes a sign of undying life. Christmas gifts are usually placed on the tree or arranged at its base. The symbol thus also becomes eloquent in a typically Christian sense: it calls to mind the "tree of life" (cf. Gn 2: 9), a figure of Christ, God's supreme gift to humanity.
3. The message of the Christmas tree is consequently that life stays "evergreen" if we make a gift of it: not so much of material things, but of life itself:  in friendship and sincere affection, in fraternal help and forgiveness, in time shared and reciprocal listening.
May Mary help us to live Christmas as an occasion to savour the joy of giving ourselves to our brothers and sisters, especially the neediest.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said: 
Dear children of Beslan, I greet you on the occasion of the Nativity of Christ. I greet with great affection the children and young people from Beslan, Ossezia, who are staying with some friends of the Discalced Carmelites of Trent. Dear friends, may the good that you are receiving from so many friends help you recover from the injuries of the terrible experience you have been through. Happy Christmas!
I greet all the pilgrims present, especially the faithful from the Roman Parishes of St Tarcisius and St Frances Cabrini, and from Taranto and Castellaneta. A thought also goes to the "For Another Hope" Association from Verona.
Have a good Sunday and a Happy Christmas!
 

© Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Third Sunday of Advent, 12 December 2004
  1. The feast of Christmas is approaching and in many places, such as here in St Peter's Square, the Christmas crib is already being set up. Small or large, simple or elaborate, it is a familiar and most vivid representation of Christmas. The Nativity scene is a feature of our culture and art, but above all it is a sign of faith in God, who in Bethlehem came "and dwelt among us" (Jn 1: 14).
2. As I do every year, in a little while I shall bless the Baby Jesus figurines that on the Holy Night will be placed in the Christmas cribs, where St Joseph and Our Lady are already silent witnesses of a sublime mystery. With their loving gaze they invite us to watch and pray in order to welcome the divine Saviour, who comes to bring the joy of Christmas to the world.
3. Today's liturgy, the Third Sunday of Advent known as "Gaudete" Sunday, invites us to a foretaste of this joy. Let us ask the "Virgin of waiting" that the desire to encounter the Lord who is now at hand may be alive in Christians and in all people of good will.
After the Angelus: 
Today, in the Diocese of Rome, we are celebrating the Day for Building New Churches in the City's suburbs. In recent years, 54 communities have received a new church, but at least another 20 are still waiting. I therefore encourage you to be generous so that all may find a place in which to grow in faith and in Christian life.
I also remind you that on Tuesday, 14 December, at 5: 30 p.m. in St Peter's Basilica, I will preside at Holy Mass for university students of the Roman Athenaeums. I invite all to join in this celebration.
I greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims, especially the faithful from the Dioceses of Granada, Guadix-Baza, Málaga, Madrid, Oviedo, Segovia and Zamora. Let us rejoice! The Lord is near and comes to save us!
Lastly, I greet the pilgrims present, in particular the children of Rome with their "Baby Jesus" figurines, the Monteverdi Choir from Val di Non, the Diocesan Youth Choir from Alessandria and the faithful from Fiano Romano.
I wish you all a good Sunday!
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
SOLEMNITY OF THE IMMACULATE CONCEPTION
OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Wednesday, 8 December 2004
  1. Tota pulchra es, Maria!
On 8 December 1854, 150 years ago, Bl. Pius IX proclaimed the Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary.
The privilege of being preserved free from original sin means that she was the first to be redeemed by her Son. Her sublime beauty, which mirrors that of Christ, is for all believers a pledge of the victory of divine Grace over sin and death.
2. The Immaculate Conception shines like a beacon of light for humanity in all the ages. At the beginning of the third millennium, it guides us to believe and hope in God, in his salvation and in eternal life. In particular, it lights the way of the Church, which is committed to the new evangelization.
3. This afternoon, in my traditional tribute to the Blessed Virgin in Piazza di Spagna, I will entrust the city of Rome and the whole world to her, the Immaculate Mother of the Word made Man. Let us now pray for her powerful intercession with filial trust as we recite the Angelus.
After the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said: 
Yesterday evening in Mossul, Iraq, an Armenian Apostolic Church and the Chaldean Archbishop's residence were destroyed. I express my spiritual closeness to the faithful, deeply distressed by the attack, and I pray the Lord through the intercession of the Immaculate Virgin that the Iraqi People may at last experience a time of reconciliation and peace.
I greet the pilgrims present, in particular the representatives of the Pontifical Academy of the Immaculate Conception, led by Cardinal Andrzej Maria Deskur. Dear friends, on this feast day I am particularly close to you. I pray for you and encourage you to persevere in your devotion to Mary Immaculate.
May the Virgin obtain the graces desired for one and all.
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Second Sunday of Advent, 5 December 2004
  1. We are preparing to celebrate with profound joy the Solemnity of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary, which this year acquires special significance. Indeed, we will be commemorating the 150th anniversary of the proclamation of this important Marian Dogma.
2. We will commemorate this anniversary this coming 8 December with a solemn Eucharistic Celebration in the Vatican Basilica, where my venerable Predecessor, Blessed Pius IX, proclaimed the Dogma of the Immaculate Conception in 1854 together with a multitude of Bishops from every part of the world. In this way we will honour the Tota pulchra (All Fair), the One God chose to be the Mother of his only-begotten Son.
3. In the afternoon I will then go to Piazza di Spagna, as I do every year, for the traditional tribute to the Immaculate Virgin.
I invite you all, dear Romans and pilgrims, to join me in this act of filial veneration for our heavenly Mother.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus the Holy Father said: 
I extend a special Advent greeting to the German-speaking pilgrims and visitors. I would like in particular to welcome the group from the Parish of Graz-Sankt Peter. May God's grace go with you!
I greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims, especially those from "Colegio Claret" in Madrid. May Mary, Mother of Hope, guide your life in this season of Advent. Many thanks!
I greet the Salesian Provincials present  at  the  Angelus  with  their Rector Major. Dear friends, through you my thoughts reach out to the entire Salesian  Family, which  I  cordially bless.
I then greet the Italian-speaking pilgrims and in particular the organizers and animators of the "Days for Italian Cooperation in Development" and the groups of the faithful who have come from Melfi, Lavello and Catanzaro.
I wish you all a good Sunday.
    © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
     
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
First Sunday of Advent, 28 November 2004
  1. Today begins a new liturgical year with the first Sunday of Advent; during this year, we will contemplate with special fervour the face of Christ present in the Eucharist. Jesus, the incarnate Word who died and has risen, is the centre of history. The Church adores him and grasps in him the ultimate and unifying meaning of all the mysteries of the faith:  the love of God that gives life.
2. It is in Italy precisely in these days that the preparatory work for the XXIV National Eucharistic Congress, to be held in Bari, Italy, from 21 to 29 May 2005, is starting. The theme of this important ecclesial meeting, which by providential coincidence places more emphasis on the Year of the Eucharist, is: "We cannot live without Sunday".
I invite the Italian Ecclesial Community to prepare most carefully for this spiritual appointment, rediscovering "with new intensity the meaning of Sunday: its "mystery', its celebration, its significance for Christian and human life" (Apostolic Letter Dies Domini, n. 3).
3. May Mary Most Holy, "Woman of the Eucharist" and Virgin of Advent, prepare us all to joyfully welcome Christ's coming and to celebrate worthily his sacramental presence in the mystery of the Eucharist.
         © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Solemnity of Christ the King
Sunday, 21 November 2004
  1. Today, the last Sunday of the liturgical year, we are celebrating the Solemnity of Christ the King.
The Fathers of the Second Vatican Council were focusing on Christ the King 40 years ago when, on 21 November, they promulgated the Dogmatic Constitution that begins with the words "Lumen gentium cum sit Christus", "Christ is the Light of humanity".
Lumen Gentium marked a milestone in the Church's journey on the highways of the contemporary world and was an incentive to the People of God to assume their responsibilities with greater determination in building the Kingdom of Christ, which will be fulfilled only beyond history.
2. Indeed, every baptized person, especially the lay faithful, is duty bound to spread the Gospel in the temporal order (cf. Lumen Gentium, nn. 31, 35, 36, 38). Moreover, in this mission, the Compendium of the Social Doctrine of the Church is a useful aid; it was published just this year by the Pontifical Council for Justice and Peace, to which I renew my gratitude.
3. However, if it is to achieve its goal every human undertaking must find support in prayer. Today we are celebrating the Day of Prayer. I entrust to Mary Most Holy the communities of contemplative life whom I greet with affection. May these brothers and sisters of ours never lack the spiritual and material support of all the faithful.
After the Angelus:
Today in Italy Migration Day is being celebrated on the theme: "The world as a home: from mistrust to welcome". I greet all migrants and those who sustain them on their journey of faith and brotherhood. God bless you!
I greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims, especially those from the Diocese of Huelva. Faithful to Christ the King, proclaim the Gospel! Have a happy Sunday!
I greet the Italian-speaking pilgrims, especially the parish group from Nimis with the friends of Lannach-Graz, Austria, the group from Sts Peter and Paul Parish in Pescasseroli, the "Fogolar Furlan" Choir from Milan and the faithful from Ancona, Loreto, Aprutino and Avezzano.
I wish you all a good Sunday!
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 14 November 2004
  1. Today in Italy we are celebrating the Day of Thanksgiving to God for the fruits of the earth gathered during the year.
The main celebration is being held in Genoa, chosen this year as the "European Capital of Culture". I willingly join in the prayers that are being raised by the Ecclesial Community of Genoa and by all those who work in various capacities in the agricultural sector.
2. For us Christians, the Eucharist is the fullest expression of thanksgiving. At every holy Mass, we bless the Lord, God of the universe, and present to him the bread and the wine, fruits "which earth has given and human hands have made". Christ bound to these simple foods the sacrificial offering of himself. United with him, believers too are called to offer to God their lives and their daily work.
3. May Mary, Mother of God, teach us to be grateful to the Lord for all that nature and human labour produce for our sustenance, and may she make us willing to share our resources with those in need.
After the Angelus, the Pope said:
I greet the pilgrims present, particularly the members of Verona's Association of Scholae Cantorum, accompanied by the Vicar General of the Diocese.
I wish you all a good Sunday!
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 7 November 2004
  1. Popular piety has dedicated the month of November to the faithful departed. We confidently pray for them knowing that, as Jesus affirms in today's Gospel reading, "God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. All are alive for him" (Lk 20: 38). He remains faithful to his covenant with mankind, a covenant that death itself cannot destroy.
2. This alliance, sealed in Christ's Passover, is continually renewed in the sacrament of the Eucharist. It is here, therefore, that prayer for the deceased reaches its summit. By offering Holy Mass for them, believers are sustaining their final purification. Bonds of spiritual love with the deceased are strengthened when Holy Communion is received with faith.
3. May Mary Most Holy intercede from Paradise for all of our beloved deceased. As pilgrims on the earth, may she strengthen our faith in the final resurrection, whose promise is offered to us in the sacrament of the Eucharist.
After leading the prayer of the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
I greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims, especially those coming from the parish communities of Corazón de María y San Agustín de Canarias and El Salvador de La Palma, and to the members of the Ecuadorian Navy.
I greet the Brazilian pilgrims and take this opportunity to thank God in praise for your noble Nation's faithfulness to the Gospel of Christ. It is my wish that all Leaders of Brazil continue to defend life from its conception to natural death. Praised be Jesus Christ.
I greet the people of Africa present at this Angelus and express my concern for the heart-rending news coming from Côte d'Ivoire, where violence is claiming new victims. May weapons be silenced, peace agreements be respected and the path of dialogue be followed! I entrust the Peoples of Côte d'Ivoire to Mary, Queen of Peace.
I turn my thoughts to the Italian-speaking pilgrims, especially to the "Mercy group of San Nicola Manfredi", coming from Benevento.
Finally, today in Poland, "Hospice Day" is being celebrated; its motto is: "Hospice is also life". The care given by workers and volunteers to those who are terminally ill and dying is a great work of mercy. I ask God to reward their love and dedication with his grace. I also entrust those who assist the suffering in their own homes to Mary Most Holy. God bless everyone.
I wish a pleasant Sunday to all.
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Solemnity of All Saints
Monday, 1 November 2004
  1. "Let us all rejoice in the Lord on this solemnity of all Saints". With this joyful invitation, today begins the Eucharistic Celebration in honour of All the Saints. The pilgrim Church on earth lifts its gaze to Heaven and exultantly joins the choir of those with whom God shares his glory. It is the communion of saints!
2. Appropriately in light of this wonderful mystery, we will celebrate tomorrow the Commemoration of all the faithful departed. The Liturgy invites us to broaden our hearts and pray for everyone, especially for the souls most in need of divine mercy.
I raise a special prayer to God for all victims of terrorism. I feel spiritually close to their families, and while I ask God to ease their sorrow, I appeal to him for peace in the world.
3. May Mary, Queen of All Saints, help us to faithfully follow Christ, in order to reach the glory of Heaven.
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 31 October 2004
  1. On Friday, 29 October, the Constitutional Treaty of the European Union was signed here in Rome, at the Campidoglio. This was a highly significant moment in building the "new Europe", which we continue to look upon with confidence. It is the most recent stage in a journey that will be long and evermore binding.
2. The Holy See has always favoured the promotion of a united Europe based on those common values that make up its history. Keeping in mind Europe's Christian roots means to take advantage of a spiritual patrimony that remains essential for the future development of the Union.
Therefore, I hope that in the years to come, Christians will continue to carry with them into all sectors of European institutions that "evangelical yeast" that is the pledge of peace and collaboration between all citizens in the shared effort to serve the common good.
3. Let us now prayerfully entrust all peoples of the Continent to Mary, Queen of Europe.
After leading the prayer of the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
I greet the Authorities and children taking part in the "Race of the Heart", together with the "Peoples Run" event, now starting off from Tirana, in Albania. I wish this initiative great success, which is being held in memory of Bl. Teresa of Calcutta and aimed at promoting blood donation.
I cordially greet the French-speaking pilgrims, especially the Religious and collaborators of the schools of the Congregation of the Brothers of Our Lady, Mother of Mercy, who have come from Belgium. May you help young people to become mature men and women, and to grow in faith.
I greet all pilgrims present and wish you a pleasant Sunday.
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
World Mission Day
Sunday, 24 October 2004
  1. World Mission Day is being celebrated today. It is dedicated to prayer and to concrete support for the missions. In addition, all believers are asked on this day to revitalize their own responsibility in the proclamation of the Gospel to all peoples. I thank the Cardinal Prefect of the Congregation for the Evangelization of Peoples and the Pontifical Missionary Societies that promote this Day in my name, and I encourage the diocesan and parish initiatives for this purpose.
2. I address a most cordial welcome and my profound thanks to all the missionaries, men and women, who are working on the frontiers of evangelization. I assure them of my special remembrance in prayer. In particular, I am thinking of those who have crowned their witness to Christ and their service to humanity with the sacrifice of their lives.
3. May Mary Most Holy, Queen of the Missions, obtain everywhere in the Church the gift of numerous vocations to the missionary life.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said in Spanish and in Italian: 
I greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims, especially the Association of the Lord of Miracles, as well as the Peruvians and Latin Americans who live in Rome and have come to this Square with the venerable image. Thank you for your presence and your prayers!
I greet the Italian-speaking pilgrims, and in particular the parish group of San Pancrazio near Ravenna, who have come here to honour the 17th centenary of their holy Patron's martyrdom.
I wish you all a good Sunday!
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 17 October 2004
    1. The International Eucharistic Congress closes today in the Mexican city of Guadalajara. For eight days the Eucharist has been celebrated and adored as the "light and life of the new millennium". "Light", because the presence of Christ, the Light of the world, shines forth in the Eucharistic mystery; "life", because in the Eucharist Jesus gave us himself, the Bread of life.
This afternoon I will preside at a Eucharistic celebration in St Peter's Basilica in spiritual union with the great gathering in Guadalajara. In this way, I will solemnly open the Year of the Eucharist that will last until October 2005.
2. In the wake of the Second Vatican Council and the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000, the Year of the Eucharist is to be a strong time for meeting Christ, who is present in the sacrament of his Body and his Blood. In this mystery, he sacramentally actualizes his Paschal sacrifice which redeemed humanity from the slavery of sin and inaugurated the divine Kingdom of love, justice and peace.
The Church was born from Christ's Pasch which is why she "draws her life from the Eucharist", as I recall in the Encyclical Ecclesia de Eucharistia (n. 1).
3. Let us together invoke the Virgin Mary, so that she will help all Christians to live this Year of the Eucharist as a time of deep conversion to Christ and intense commitment to spreading his message of salvation.
After leading the prayer of the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to all those who sent me their good wishes and assured me of their prayers on the anniversary of my election to the Chair of Peter.
While I ask the Lord to bring comfort to all with the abundance of his gifts, I entrust myself to him and ask, through the intercession of the Most Holy Virgin, for his constant help in making the exercise of my ministry in the Church fruitful.
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 10 October 2004
    1. The International Eucharistic Congress on the theme: "The Eucharist, light and life of the new millennium" opened today in Guadalajara, Mexico. I join in spirit this important ecclesial event which also opens the Year of the Eucharist.
For this special Year, I addressed to the entire Church an Apostolic Letter that begins with these words: "Mane Nobiscum Domine - Stay with us, Lord" (cf. Lk 24: 29). This invocation rings out in every Christian community: by recognizing the risen Christ "in the breaking of the bread" (Lk 24: 35), may the faithful be ready to witness to him with fruitful charity.
2. The diocesan Caritas is a privileged expression of charity in the local Church. In Rome, Caritas is celebrating its 25th anniversary. I thank God for all the good fruits that have ripened in these years and I encourage the Ecclesial Community to continue in the work of formation and in activities at the service of the poor and needy.
3. Let us entrust these intentions to the intercession of Mary Most Holy, "Woman of the Eucharist" (Ecclesia de Eucharistia, chap. VI).
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
I send my greeting to the Italian Catholics who in these days have been taking part in their Social Week in Bologna on the theme: "Democracy: new scenes, new powers". May the reflection of this important Congress offer new incentives to the Ecclesial Community of Italy for an ever more effective witness in every area of the Country's life.
Next Sunday afternoon [17 October], in spiritual communion with all those in Guadalajara, Mexico, who will be concluding the International Eucharistic Congress, I will preside in St Peter's at a solemn Celebration for the opening of the Year of the Eucharist throughout the Church. I invite the faithful to participate in large numbers in this important ecclesial event, in order to pay a unanimous homage to Christ, the Light and Life of the new millennium.
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 3 October 2004
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. On this first Sunday of October, the month dedicated especially to Our Lady of the Rosary, I invite you to recite this beautiful prayer in imitation of the new Blesseds.
In French: 
2. I greet the French-speaking Bishops and faithful, especially those from the Dioceses of the new Blesseds; I also greet the representatives of civil society, the Trappist monks and the Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament. May the Blesseds help to give new impetus to your Ecclesial Communities, whose spiritual renewal I was able to observe at Lourdes!
In Spanish: 
3. I cordially greet the Bishops, priests and faithful, together with the Authorities who have come from Argentina for the Beatification of Mother Ludovica De Angelis; and in a special way I greet the Daughters of Our Lady of Mercy. As I encourage you all to imitate the new Blessed's virtues, I recall her devotion to the Holy Rosary, which she always held in her hands.
In German: 
4. I greet with joy the German-speaking pilgrims, especially the countless faithful who have come to Rome from Austria and the Diocese of Münster for the Beatification of Emperor Charles I and of Anne Catherine Emmerick. I address a particular greeting to the official delegations of Austria, Liechtenstein and Luxembourg, together with Emperor Charles' son, the Archduke Otto and his large family. May the love of Jesus be with you!
    © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 26 September 2004
  1. This Sunday the Gospel presents the Parable of the "Rich Man" and the poor Lazarus (cf. Lk 16: 19-31). The rich man lived in opulence and luxury, ignoring the beggar on his doorstep. But after his death, the situation was reversed:  Lazarus was welcomed into Paradise, whereas the rich man ended up in torment.
The teaching found in the Parable is clear: all individuals must show not selfishness but solidarity in the use they make of their possessions.
2. This famous Gospel passage is particularly appropriate in reference to the problem of the imbalance between wealth and poverty in today's world. Precisely in the past few days, an important Meeting of Heads of State and Government was held in New York for a more supportive and effective action against "hunger and poverty". Cardinal Angelo Sodano, Secretary of State, also took part in it, showing the Holy See's support for this new initiative.
The Catholic Church assures her full commitment to uproot from the world the scourge of hunger and the other consequences of poverty. In this context I am pleased to recall the meeting of all the Nuncios in Africa that was recently held at the Vatican.
3. Let us pray to the Lord so that he supports the efforts made by the international community for justice and development in solidarity. This is indeed the way that can guarantee the world a future of peace.
We ask this through the intercession of the Blessed Virgin Mary, to whom we entrust in a special way the families and peoples most sorely tried by the unjust distribution of the goods that God has made available for all his children.
After the Angelus, the Pope said: 
This coming Thursday, 30 September, we are to celebrate World Maritime Day, organized by the United Nations. My thoughts go out to all who work at sea, and I pray that they may be able to live with dignity and security.
I greet the English-speaking pilgrims here today and I entrust you all to the loving protection of the Blessed Virgin Mary, Help of Christians.
    © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 19 September 2004
  1. In the face of evil manifested in various forms in the world, distressed and bewildered human beings are asking themselves: "Why?".
At the dawn of this third millennium, blessed by the Great Jubilee and full of potential, humanity is scarred by the overwhelming spread of terrorism. The series of atrocious attacks on human life disturbs and worries consciences and gives rise to the searching question that recurs in the Psalms: "Why Lord? Until when?".
2. God has answered this anguishing question that emanates from the scandal of evil, not with an explanation of principle, as if desiring to justify himself, but with the sacrifice of his own Son on the Cross. The apparent triumph of evil and the definitive victory of good converge in the death of Jesus; the darkest moment in history and the revelation of divine glory; the breaking point and the centre of attraction and of the recomposition of the universe. "And I", Jesus says, "once I am lifted up from earth, will draw all men to myself" (Jn 12: 32).
For believers, the Cross of Christ is an icon of hope, because it was on the Cross that the saving plan of God's love was brought about. Several days ago, therefore, the liturgy invited us to celebrate the Triumph of the Holy Cross, a feast from which believers draw comfort and courage.
3. Fixing our gaze on the crucified Christ, in spiritual union with the Virgin Mary, let us continue on our way, sustained by the power of the Resurrection.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
I warmly welcome the English-speaking pilgrims and I encourage you to follow Christ with confidence and generosity.
I greet the Italian speaking pilgrims, especially the delegation from the Molise Region at the official opening of the school year; the parish priest, altar servers and their relatives of St George the Martyr Parish in Victoria, Gozo, Malta; and the group of the Work of the Church. On the Occasion of World Alzheimer's Day, I assure my prayer to all the sick and to all who are nursing them.
I wish everyone a good Sunday.
    © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 12 September 2004
  1. According to an ancient tradition, today we are celebrating the feast of the Holy Name of Mary. Indissolubly linked to the Name of Jesus, for Christians this name is the sweetest, for it reminds everyone of the Mother they have in common. Jesus, dying, entrusted us all to her as children.
May Mary watch over humanity in this time that is marked by overwhelming explosions of violence. May she watch especially over the new generations who are eager to build a future of hope for one and all.
2. I also noticed this deep aspiration to a world of justice and peace in the children, young people and adults of Italian Catholic Action, whom I met last Sunday at Loreto on the occasion of their national pilgrimage.
I am grateful to the Lord for having given me the opportunity to take part in this important ecclesial event, which culminated in the proclamation of three new Blesseds: Alberto Marvelli, Pina Suriano and Pere Tarrés i Claret.
In recalling their witness, I would like here to recall the three duties I entrusted to Catholic Action: "contemplation", to walk on the path of holiness; "communion", to promote the spirituality of unity; and "mission", to be Gospel leaven everywhere.
3. May Our Lady help Catholic Action to persevere enthusiastically in its commitment to apostolic witness, always working in close connection with the hierarchy, taking a responsible part in the pastoral work of the parish and the Diocese.
The Church is counting on the active presence of Catholic Action and its faithful devotion to the great cause of Christ's Kingdom. I too look to Catholic Action with great confidence, and I encourage all its members to be generous witnesses of the Good News of the Gospel in order to restore hope to contemporary society which is in search of peace.
After the Angelus, the Pope said:
I greet the International Ecumenical Working Group for Pastoral Care Among Deaf People, with gratitude for their efforts to bring God's Word to the hearing impaired. I also welcome the new students of the University of Dallas Rome Program. Upon all the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors I cordially invoke God's Blessings of joy and peace.
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
VISIT OF HIS HOLINESS
JOHN PAUL II
TO LORETO
ANGELUS
Esplanade of Montorso
Sunday, 5 September 2004
  Dear Friends,
1. At the end of this intense celebration, I would like once again to express to you my joy at being able to be with you. May you always be available to the voice of the Lord Jesus!
Just as he needed Mary's fiat to become flesh, so his Gospel also needs your "yes" in order to become history in the contemporary world.
2. A very special greeting to the pilgrims from the Archdiocese of Barcelona and the Diocese of Vic, who are accompanied by Cardinal Ricardo María Carles, by Archbishop Lluís Martínez Sistach of Barcelona, by the Bishop of Vic and by the other Catalan Bishops.
The new Blessed is a great honour for your Land. His figure as a man, doctor and priest, is a shining example for the Christians of our time.
I also cordially greet the pilgrims from other Dioceses in Spain and in Latin America who, together with their Bishops, have taken part in the International Congress of Catholic Action.
Catholic Action is and wants to be the school at which people learn to choose God with all their heart and to follow Christ as the one Lord of our life.
3. Dear Friends, I invite you to renew your "yes" and I consign to you three duties:  the first is "contemplation":  strive to walk on the path of holiness, keeping your gaze fixed on Jesus, the one Teacher and Saviour of all.
The second duty is "communion": endeavour to promote the spirituality of unity with the Pastors of the Church, with all the brethren in the faith and with the other ecclesial associations. Be the leaven of dialogue with all people of good will.
The third duty is "mission": as lay people, take the leaven of the Gospel to homes and schools, to places of work and recreation. The Gospel is a word of hope and salvation for the world.
May the sweet Lady of Loreto obtain for you fidelity to your vocation, generosity in carrying out your daily duties and enthusiasm in dedicating yourselves to the mission that the Church entrusts to you!
   
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 29 August 2004
  1. Today, 29 August, Christian tradition commemorates the martyrdom of St John the Baptist; the Messiah himself says in praise of him: "none born of woman is greater" (cf. Lk 7: 28). He gave to God the supreme witness of his blood, sacrificing his life for truth and justice; indeed, his head was cut off at the orders of Herod, whom he had dared to tell that it was not lawful to take his brother's wife (cf. Mc 6: 17-29).
2. In the Encyclical Veritatis Splendor, recalling the sacrifice of John the Baptist (cf. n. 91), I observed that martyrdom is "an outstanding sign of the holiness of the Church" (n. 93). Indeed, it "represents the high point of the witness to moral truth" (ibid.).
Although relatively few are called to make this supreme sacrifice, it is nonetheless "a consistent witness which all Christians must daily be ready to make, even at the cost of suffering and grave sacrifice" (ibid.). At times, a truly heroic effort is also needed in daily life, in order not to give in to the difficulties that are an incentive to compromise and to live the Gospel "sine glossa".
3. The heroic example of John the Baptist reminds us of the martyrs for the faith who down the centuries followed courageously in his footsteps. I recall in particular the multitude of Christians in the last century who were also victims of religious hatred in various European nations. Today too, in some parts of the world, believers are still subjected to harsh trials for adhering to Christ and his Church.
May these brothers and sisters of ours feel the full solidarity of the entire Ecclesial Community! Let us entrust them to the Blessed Virgin, Queen of Martyrs, whom we call on together at this moment.
After leading the prayer of the Angelus, the Holy Father said the following:
I cordially greet the French-speaking pilgrims. May the Word of the Lord guide you every day, so that you will always be humble and attentive to others!
I warmly welcome the English-speaking visitors present at this Angelus. May Almighty God bless you and your families with joy and peace!
A cordial welcome to the German-speaking pilgrims and visitors. Bear witness to Christian hope for everyone!
I greet with affection the Spanish- speaking pilgrims. May the Lord grant you an abundance of graces and blessings in order to carry out his will every day of your life!
I greet the Dominican Sisters of the Congregation of the Guardian Angels, and I wish them ever greater fidelity to their religious charism.
I greet with affection the Italian pilgrims here: in particular, the men and women missionaries who are taking part in the formation course organized by the Pontifical Salesian University, the superiors and seminarians of the Pontifical North American College and the group of Legionaries of Christ. I then greet the faithful from Angarano in Bassando del Grappa, from San Giorgio delle Pertiche, the group "Friends of Fraterna Domus" from Rome and from various provinces in the Venice region, as well as those taking part in the "Bicycle for Peace" demonstration, who come from Castegnato.
I send a special greeting to the Archbishop of Genoa, Cardinal Tarcisio Bertone, and to the faithful gathered round him at the Shrine of Our Lady della Guardia, whose image my venerable Predecessor Benedict XV placed in the Vatican Gardens. May the Most Holy Virgin obtain peace for all humanity!
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 22 August 2004
 
1. Today is the feast of the Queenship of Mary, a feast closely connected with the mystery of the Assumption which last Sunday, 15 August, I had the joy of celebrating at the Shrine of Lourdes.
As I repeat my gratitude to God and to all who helped me make that Pilgrimage, I think back in mind and heart to that humble Grotto of Massabielle. And from that place of silence and prayer where everything speaks of Mary, I go to other Marian Shrines, visited this month of August by throngs of the faithful.
2. Indeed, the feasts proper to so many Marian Shrines fit within the span of this month. I will limit myself to recalling the Shrines in Italy of: Loreto and Pompei, Our Lady of Oropa in Biella, Our Lady della Guardia in Genoa and Our Lady of Tears in Syracuse. Then, I cannot forget the Polish Shrines of Czestochowa and Kalvaria, where I have stopped many times to call on Our Lady's motherly help for the Church and for the world. May the heavenly Mother of the Redeemer be increasingly welcomed, loved and venerated by the Christian people!
3. In this context, I invite you to address with me the Virgin Mary, venerated with the title of Mother of God of Kazan. Her Icon, which left Russia in the 1920s, ended up in the Pope's Apartment and has watched over his daily work from that moment. Today I am pleased to announce that a special Delegation will return this Icon, so dear to me, to His Holiness Alexei II, Patriarch of Moscow and All Russia.
Next Wednesday, 25 August, at the General Audience, together with the faithful, we will gather round this Icon to pray. From this moment, let us entrust to Mary, Mother of unity and love, all our entreaties for the good of the Church and of the entire human family.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
I now address my greeting to all the participants in the 25th Meeting for Friendship among Peoples, which is taking place at Rimini in these days. In particular, I extend a cordial thought to Mons. Luigi Giussani, founder and leader of the Communion and Liberation Movement, which promotes the Meeting.
This year's theme: "Our progress does not consist in presuming we have arrived, but in constantly striving for our goal", is a pleasing synthesis between the Christian spirit and a typical value of modern culture, precisely: "progress". Christianity, despite human limitations and errors, constitutes the most important factor of true progress because Christ is the inexhaustible principle for the renewal of humankind and of the world. May all believers, therefore, and all who genuinely seek the truth, find in Christ a cause for commitment and hope. This is my wish, which I accompany with a special Blessing.
A good Sunday to you all!
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
PILGRIMAGE
OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL II
TO LOURDES ON THE OCCASION OF 150TH ANNIVERSARY
OF THE PROMULGATION OF THE DOGMA
OF THE IMMACULATE CONCEPTION
ANGELUS
Prairie de la Ribère
Sunday 15 August 2004
  1. At the conclusion of this solemn Liturgy, I wish to offer a special greeting to those taking part in the French National Pilgrimage led by the "Famille de l’Assomption".
I greet in particular all the young people, who are so much at home in Lourdes and have placed themselves so generously at the service of their sick brothers and sisters as hospitaliers. I recall with fondness my meetings with young people in France: our first meeting in Paris, then those in Lyons, Strasbourg and once again in Paris for World Youth Day. Dear young friends: these meetings have given me a great hope which I wish to share with you today. Let Mary be your teacher, and you will bring a fresh breath of optimism to the world, as you proclaim to all the "good news" of Christ’s Kingdom.
2. From the rock of Massabielle, the Blessed Virgin appeared to Bernadette. Revealing herself as the one who is full of God’s grace, she called for penance and prayer. She indicated to Bernadette a spring of water and asked her to drink of it. That spring of fresh water has become one of the symbols of Lourdes: a symbol of the new life which Christ gives to all who turn to him.
Christianity is truly a fountain of life, and Mary is the first guardian of this fountain. She points it out to all people, inviting them to renounce their pride and to learn humility, so that they can draw from the mercy of her Son and thus work together for the dawn of the civilization of love.
3. As we meditate on the mystery of the incarnation of Jesus, let us now turn to Mary Most Holy, imploring her protection upon each of us, upon the Church and upon the world.
After the Angelus:
I cordially greet the pilgrims from Italy. May the Virgin Mary accompany you with her motherly smile and lead you to her Son Jesus. I cordially bless you all.
I wish the Spanish-speaking pilgrims the fulfilment of their intentions through the intercession of the Virgin Mary, whom we venerate together in this place, and the Lord's constant assistance. With my Blessing.
My dear English-speaking brothers and sisters, may the Assumption into Heaven of our Blessed Lady remind us of the eternal Home to which we are all destined. God bless you all!
I offer the pilgrims from Belgium and Holland my greeting and Blessing, and I hope that they will be able to learn constantly at the school of Mary to accept God's presence in their lives.
I invite you German-speaking pilgrims to grow in availability to the work of God's grace, after the example of the Virgin Mary. With my Blessing to each.
An affectionate greeting to my fellow countrymen! While we recall the celebrations that are taking place today at the Shrine of Czestochowa, let us renew together, dear brothers and sisters, our entrustment and devotion to the Mother of Christ, Queen of Poland. I bless you with affection.
Lastly, to you, dear brothers and sisters of France: thank you for your welcome! Thank you for the beautiful celebrations at which we have participated together during this two-day pilgrimage!
I thank all those who worked so hard to make my presence among you possible! I entrust you all to the intercession of the Virgin Mary and of St Bernadette. May their prayers obtain that you remain strong in faith, joyful in hope and generous in charity.
The Pope's prayer goes with you. I bless you all with deep affection.
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 8 August 2004
   1. Two days ago, on the Feast of the Transfiguration, we commemorated the anniversary of the death of the Servant of God Paul VI. This anniversary has acquired special significance because exactly 40 years ago my venerable Predecessor published his first Encyclical, Ecclesiam Suam.
From the beginning of that memorable Document, he declared his passionate love for the Church, called to mirror the glorious light of the face of Christ; and he pointed out certain fundamental "paths of the Church":  self-knowledge, renewal and dialogue. "The Church", he wrote, "is more alive today than ever before. But when we weigh the matter more closely we see that there is still a great way to go. In fact, the work which is beginning today will never come to an end" (Website of the Holy See, Ecclesiam Suam, n. 117; cf. also nn. 9, 11, 12).
These words retain their full timeliness and are an incentive to all believers to continue with awareness the authentic ecclesial renewal that began with the Second Vatican Council.
2. In a few days the 28th celebration of the Olympic Games will be inaugurated in Athens. I send my cordial greetings to the official delegations, to the national representatives, to the athletes and to all who will be taking part in the Olympics. As I remember the cordiality with which the Greek people welcomed me on the occasion of my pilgrimage in the footsteps of the Apostle Paul, I would also like to greet with special warmth the City of Athens.
I deeply hope that in the world today, disturbed and sometimes overwhelmed by so many forms of hatred and violence, the important sports event of the Games will be an opportunity for a friendly encounter and will serve to further peace and understanding among the peoples.
3. Upon the Olympics and upon the whole of the world of sport I invoke the maternal protection of the Most Holy Virgin.
I would also like to entrust to Mary the pilgrimage which, please God, I will be making to the Shrine of Lourdes next Saturday and Sunday, to celebrate the Assumption of Mary on the 150th anniversary of the proclamation of the Dogma of the Immaculate Conception.
After the Angelus, the Pope said the following: 
I greet you, dear French-speaking pilgrims, and I entrust you to Our Lady of Lourdes, to whose shrine I will be going on pilgrimage next Saturday and Sunday.
I warmly welcome the English-speaking visitors, especially the Canadian Cascade Band. May Mary, Queen of Heaven, be close to all of you during these summer days, and may Almighty God bless you.
I am pleased to greet the German-speaking pilgrims and visitors. Keep yourselves ready for the second coming of the Lord! Entrust your lives to him as Mary did! May God preserve you in his love.
I greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims. I invite you to call on the Virgin Mary, our hope because of her Immaculate Conception and her motherly intercession. A happy Sunday to you all!
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 1 August 2004
   1. This Sunday the liturgy presents to us anew Jesus' teaching on what true riches are:  not the wealth of material goods, but the spiritual treasure that consists in recognizing the primacy of God in our lives, letting his Gospel guide us in all our daily decisions. Jesus explained to the crowd following him that the person is a fool who "lays up treasure for himself and is not rich toward God" (cf. Lk 12: 21).
2. Dear Brothers and Sisters, Mary, who describes herself as "the handmaid" of the Lord and totally abandons herself to the divine will, is a unique witness and an eloquent example of this spiritual "treasure". May the Blessed Virgin guide us on the arduous but liberating path of Christian holiness, a source of peace and inner joy.
I will ask this grace for all believers during my pilgrimage to Lourdes, where I shall be going on 14 and 15 August, and then at Loreto, where on 5 September, I shall be joining the national pilgrimage of the Italian Catholic Action, in which the Italian Sports Centre will also be taking part.
3. I thank the Italian Bishops' Conference, the Archbishop of Loreto and the directors of Catholic Action in Italy, represented by the President and the General Chaplain, for their invitation to take part in the Loreto pilgrimage. On that occasion, I will have the joy of adding to the Roll of Blesseds three members of this Association:  the doctor who became a priest, Pedro Tarrés y Claret of Barcelona, and the Italian young man and woman, Alberto Marvelli and Pina Suriano.
I urge the members of Catholic Action to come in large numbers. I will be expecting you at Loreto, dear friends! I expect the children, boys and girls, young people and families! Together we will ask Our Lady of Loreto to obtain for the Association and for the entire Christian people a new springtime of grace and commitment.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said: 
I greet all the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors present at today's Angelus. May your time in Rome deepen your love of the universal Church. Upon you all I invoke the grace and peace of Our Lord Jesus Christ. Happy holidays!
Today, on Switzerland's national feast day, I offer the Swiss Guard Corps my cordial greetings, as I vividly remember my recent Apostolic Visit to that noble Country.
Dear Brothers and Sisters, I experienced the Warsaw Uprising in Krakow with strong spiritual tension and prayers. Today, the 60th anniversary of that patriotic impulse towards freedom, I bow my head with all Poles and pay tribute to the heroes of the capital, Warsaw, who undertook to fight the occupier for the freedom and sovereignty of our Homeland. I pray that the Lord may reward those men who heroically laid down their lives. I honour and esteem all who today are enjoying the freedom for which they fought. God bless heroic Warsaw.
I wish you all a good Sunday!
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 25 July 2004
   Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. During these days of rest and relaxation, I often think of the dramatic conditions in various regions of the world. Today I would like to draw your attention in particular to the tragic events that for some time now have marked certain countries on the beloved Continent of Africa.
2. For more than 18 years, North Uganda has been embroiled in an inhuman war that involves millions of people, especially children. Many of them, in the grip of fear and deprived of any kind of future, feel forced to "become soldiers". I appeal to the International Community and to national political leaders to put an end to this tragic fighting and see that real prospects of peace are offered to the entire Ugandan Nation.
Equally disturbing is the plight of the beloved peoples of Darfur, the western region of Sudan that borders on Chad. The war, which has gathered momentum in recent months, has brought ever greater poverty, desperation and death. At least 20 harsh battles in Sudan have resulted in vast numbers of dead, evacuees and refugees. How can we remain indifferent? I address a heartfelt appeal to the political leaders and international organizations not to forget these harshly-tried brothers and sisters of ours.
3. The Christian community is striving to meet the needs of these emergencies. The Bishops in Uganda, with the help of other dioceses of the world and volunteer organizations, are working generously to achieve national reconciliation and provide assistance to those in difficulty. Just a few days ago, I decided to send Archbishop Paul Josef Cordes, President of the Pontifical Council Cor Unum, to Darfur, to bring those troubled peoples the spiritual and material solidarity of the Holy See and of the universal Church.
I ask all Christians to pray for our brothers and sisters in Africa, on whom I invoke the maternal protection of Mary.
After leading the Angelus, the Holy Father greeted the pilgrims and visitors in various languages: 
I am delighted to greet the Mayor and people of Castel Gandolfo who have come to visit me as they do every year on the occasion of the traditional Peach Festival. I warmly thank them for coming and for their gift of the typical fruit of this beloved region. I then greet the Italian pilgrims, especially, the group of young people from the Roman Parish of St Justin the Martyr, and the Novices of the Daughters of Our Lady Help of Christians.
I greet you, dear French-speaking pilgrims. At the school of the Virgin Mary, you will find a reliable guide for the following of Christ.
To all the English-speaking visitors who have joined in our prayer today I offer warm greetings. May the Lord keep you and your families in his loving care always.
I cordially welcome the German-speaking pilgrims and visitors. May Christ's peace accompany you on your way! Happy and blessed holidays!
I cordially greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims, especially the group of The Work. Today is also the feast of the Apostle St James the Greater during the Holy Year of Compostella. May he lead you all to Jesus. Have a happy Sunday!
I wish you all a good Sunday!
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
  
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Castel Gandolfo
Sunday, 18 July 2004
    1. I returned yesterday from my short stay in the Valle d'Aosta and our gathering for the Angelus today gives me the opportunity to greet all of you who have come here straight away.
On this Sunday, the liturgy once again proposes for our meditation the Gospel episode of Jesus' visit to the house of Martha and Mary (cf. Lk 10: 38-42). While Martha is totally taken up with household tasks, Mary is seated at the Master's feet listening to his word. Christ affirms that Mary "has chosen the good portion, which shall not be taken away from her" (Lk 10: 42). Listening to the Word of God is the most important thing in our lives.
2. Christ is always in our midst and desires to speak to our hearts. We can listen to him by meditating with faith on Sacred Scripture, by recollection in private and communal prayer, by silent meditation before the Tabernacle, from which he speaks to us of his love.
Christians, especially on Sundays, are called to meet and listen to the Lord. This happens most completely through participation in Holy Mass, during which Christ prepares the banquet of the Word and of the Bread of Life for the faithful. But other moments of prayer and reflection, of rest and brotherhood, can also be profitably combined to make the Lord's Day holy.
3. When, through the action of the Holy Spirit, God takes up his dwelling in the heart of the believer, it becomes easier for him/her to serve the brethren. This is what happened in a unique and perfect way in Mary Most Holy. To her we entrust this vacation period, to make the most of it as a favourable time to rediscover the primacy of the interior life.
After leading the Angelus the Holy Father greeted the groups present in various languages.
I am pleased to be with you again, dear citizens of Castel Gandolfo, and I thank you for your welcome, as warm as always. I cordially greet Cardinal Angelo Sodano, Secretary of State, titular Bishop of the Diocese of Albano, Bishop Agostino Vallini and Bishop Paolo Gillet, the Parish Priest and his collaborators. I greet the Mayor and the other municipal Authorities, the Director and the Personnel of the Pontifical Villas and all of you, dear people of Castel Gandolfo.
I greet the French-speaking visitors who are with us for the prayer of the Angelus, especially the young people. May you take Mary as the model for your Christian life!
I greet the English-speaking visitors who have prayed the Angelus with us today: may these summer months bring you the Lord's blessings of grace and peace.
I cordially greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims who have come to Castel Gandolfo for the prayer of the Angelus. May the Virgin Mary accompany you in this vacation period! Have a happy Sunday!
I greet the Polish pilgrims: from Bujaków, from the Diocese of Zielona Góra-Gorzów, the "Oasis of New Life" group in third grade, and all who are gathered with us via radio and television. God bless you all, best wishes and happy vacation!
Lastly I greet with affection the Italian-speaking pilgrims, and wish them all a good Sunday.
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Les Combes, Valle d'Aosta, Italy
Sunday, 11 July 2004
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. I greet with affection all of you who have come to Les Combes to share with me in our customary Sunday gathering at the Angelus. I warmly thank the Mayor of Introd and those who work with him for their courteous welcome, as well as the regional and provincial Authorities and all those who are ensuring that during these days my collaborators and I enjoy a peaceful stay among the charming mountains of the Valle d'Aosta.
I offer a special greeting and cordial thanks to Bishop Giuseppe Anfossi of Aosta and to the entire ecclesial community of the Vallée. I am thinking with special affection of the sick and of those who are facing great difficulties and hardship.
I greet the Cardinal Archbishop of Turin and my brother Bishops, and thank them for their presence.
2. In this calm oasis, before the wonderful display of nature, it is easy to feel the benefits of silence, a quality that is becoming rarer and rarer today. The many opportunities modern society affords for relations and information sometimes run the risk of leaving no room for recollection, even to the point of jeopardising a person's ability to reflect and pray. Actually, it is only in silence that human beings can hear in their inmost being the voice of God which truly sets them free. And holidays can help people rediscover and cultivate this indispensable inner dimension of human life.
3. A perfect example of listening to God, who speaks to the human heart, is undoubtedly Mary Most Holy. Let us turn to her, thinking of the Marian shrines in the Valle d'Aosta and the images of the Virgin that we come across on the roads and along the paths. I bless in particular the statue of the "Madonnina del Gran Paradiso", restored 50 years after it was set on the summit of the majestic mountain of that name. May Mary, whom we will be celebrating in a few days as Our Lady of Mount Carmel, help us to perceive a reflection of divine glory in the beauty of creation and encourage us to strive with all our might for the spiritual peaks of holiness.
At the end of the prayer of the Angelus, the Pope greeted groups in Italian, French and Polish. He said:
I would now like to say a special word of thanks to the Salesian community of Les Combes. I extend my greeting to the Salesians of Lombriasco, Turin, who are with us here today.
I cordially greet the French-speaking people present this morning for the prayer of the Angelus, in particular the Religious of Saint-Benoît Abbey in Port-Valais. I wish you all a good summer season. With my Apostolic Blessing.
I greet all the pilgrims present, and in particular, the Sisters from Italy, Madagascar and Côte d'Ivoire who will be taking part in the coming days in an international meeting of the Italian Federation of St Joseph. I also greet the "Famille nouvelle" Movement from Italy and other countries.
Lastly I greet the Poles present here, but from this extraordinarily beautiful place, located at the foot of the Mont Blanc, I address a special greeting to the mountains of my youth: Mount Tatry, the Beskid and Bieszczady Mountains, and all their inhabitants. God bless all my compatriots!
I wish you all a good Sunday and happy holidays!
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 4 July 2004
 
1. I feel in my heart the most profound gratitude to God for the recent visit of the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople, His Holiness Bartholomew I, to whom, together with his highly qualified entourage, I have had the joy of offering hospitality at the Vatican in these days. Together, we celebrated the feast of the holy Apostles, Peter and Paul, commemorating the historic meeting between our venerable Predecessors, Paul VI and Athenagoras I, which took place 40 years ago in Jerusalem.
We also signed a Common Declaration that confirms and reactivates the commitment of Catholics and Orthodox to the service of the great cause of the full communion of Christians.
2. Recognizing the positive steps we have taken so far and without forgetting the obstacles that still exist, we reasserted our desire to continue and indeed to intensify the ecumenical dialogue, in both fraternal relations ("dialogue of charity") and the comparison of doctrine ("dialogue of truth").
In this spirit, we were able to confront certain problems and misunderstandings that have recently emerged, offering a concrete sign of how Christians can and must always collaborate, even in the presence of divisions and conflicts. This is an eloquent way of proclaiming the Gospel of peace in a world which is unfortunately all too often scarred by imbalances and violence.
At our meeting, the realization also emerged that Catholics and Orthodox are called to work together to ensure that the European Continent does not forget its own Christian roots. Only in this way will Europe be able to carry out her proper role in the dialogue between the civilizations and in the promotion of justice, solidarity and the protection of creation across the world.
3. May God bring to fruition the resolutions formulated at this meeting. Let us entrust them to the maternal intercession of Mary Most Holy.
At the conclusion of the Angelus, the Holy Father announced to the faithful the following: 
In accepting an invitation from the Bishop of Aosta, please God, I will be leaving tomorrow to spend a few days in the Valle d'Aosta. While I prepare for this brief summer holiday, my thoughts go to families who in this period have planned their own holidays:  I hope they will be calm and relaxing for them all.
At the same time, I am thinking of all the people who for various reasons will be unable to take a real and proper holiday. I hope that each one can make the most of the essential pause in his or her work activity, and that suitable recreational initiatives, enriched by genuine human relations, will be promoted to relieve people who are lonely and in difficulty.
I greet the pilgrims present, especially the many young people of the Civil Volunteer Service of the local tourist-boards meeting in Rome for a national convention and the Choir of Sacred Heart Parish in Bellizzi, as well as the faithful from the Diocese of Naples. I also greet the Easy-Rider Association, present in St Peters with a great many Ferraris.
I wish you all a good Sunday!
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Solemnity of the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul
Tuesday, 29 June 2004
  1. The Church is celebrating the feast day of the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul: the fisherman of Galilee who first professed faith in Christ, and the teacher and doctor who proclaimed salvation to the Gentiles (cf. Preface). Through the design of divine Providence they both came to Rome where they suffered martyrdom within a few years. From that time, the city that had been the capital of a great empire was called to a very different glory: to be the home of the Apostolic See that presides over the universal mission of the Church to spread throughout the world the Gospel of Christ, Redeemer of humanity and of history.
2. This year, today's Solemnity is gladdened by the presence of His Holiness Bartholomew I, Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople, whom I have just had the joy of welcoming and greeting. His welcome visit has a special reason: 40 years ago, to be precise, in January 1964, Pope Paul VI and Patriarch Athenagoras I met in Jerusalem and exchanged a fraternal embrace. That embrace has become the symbol of the longed for reconciliation between the Catholic Church and the Orthodox Churches, as well as a prophecy of hope on the journey toward full unity among Christians.
I have invited Patriarch Bartholomew I to take part in Holy Mass at 6 p.m. later today in St Peter's Square, at which I will preside. Together we will give the homily and proclaim the common profession of faith.
During today's celebration I will also have the joy of conferring the "Pallium" upon the Metropolitan Archbishops appointed during the last year. The conferral of the Pallium is a traditional sign of communion between the See of Rome and the Churches scattered across the world, which fits beautifully into the context of the feast of the Apostles Peter and Paul.
3. I especially entrust to the two eminent Patrons the beloved Diocese of Rome as well as the Capitoline civil community. As we invoke their intercession together with that of Mary Most Holy, Salus Populi Romani, let us pray that every man and every woman may accept the message of love for which Peter and Paul suffered martyrdom.
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 27 June 2004
  1. The day after tomorrow, 29 June, we will be celebrating the Solemnity of the holy Apostles Peter and Paul. On that happy occasion I will have the joy of welcoming to the Vatican once again His Holiness Bartholomew I, Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople. We intend to commemorate together the historical encounter between our venerable Predecessors, Pope Paul VI and Patriarch Athenagoras I, who exchanged an unforgettable embrace of brotherhood and peace in Jerusalem. This happened during the pilgrimage there of the Servant of God Paul VI in 1964, while the Second Vatican Council was under way.
2. It was precisely in November of that same year that the Council Fathers approved the Decree Unitatis Redintegratio. The Decree solemnly declares that promoting Christian unity is one of the Council's main priorities, and that ecclesial institutions and communities must make every effort in striving for it (cf. nn. 1, 18).
In this period, despite the difficulties that still remain, ecumenism has made notable headway and an ecumenical sensitivity has developed in the People of God. The Week of Prayer for Christian Unity has become part of the normal liturgical and pastoral programme of dioceses and parishes. Many associations and ecclesial communities pay constant attention to fostering reciprocal knowledge and friendship among Christians of different denominations, so that they are growing ever closer in works of solidarity, justice and peace.
3. While we prepare to welcome the Ecumenical Patriarch, I invite everyone to pray for the full unity of Christians, invoking the intercession of the Virgin Mary. May the Holy Mother of God, to whom Christians of the East are so devoted, obtain in particular that the memory of the embrace of Paul VI and Athenagoras I may encourage a renewed commitment of communion between Catholics and Orthodox.
After the Angelus
Yesterday, the World Day against torture was celebrated. May the common commitment of the institutions and citizens totally ban this intolerable violation of human rights which is radically opposed to human dignity.
I greet the Israeli and Palestinian children who with their families have received hospitality in Naples. Together they want to tell the world that they desire peace and reconciliation for the Holy Land. Their words have an even greater impact because members of their families, both Palestinian and Israeli, have been victims of the current war. It is the duty of one and all not to disappoint these children and to help increase their confidence in God and others.
I greet the pilgrims who have come here, especially the participants in the National Meeting of the Third Order Franciscans on the 25th anniversary of the Rule that Paul VI gave them.
I also greet choir members of the city of Rosolini who have come on pilgrimage to the memorial places of the Apostles and the holy Roman Protomartyrs.
I wish a good Sunday to you all!
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 20 June 2004
 
1. Last Friday we celebrated the Solemnity of the Sacred Heart of Jesus, the last of the great liturgical feasts after the Easter season which constitute many wonderful embodiments of the Christian mystery: the Most Holy Trinity, the Body and Blood of Christ and, precisely, his Most Sacred Heart, "source of life and holiness", "our peace and reconciliation" (Litany of the Sacred Heart).
No one can truly know Jesus Christ well without penetrating his Heart, that is, the inmost depths of his divine and human Person (cf. Pius XII, Encyclical Haurietis Aquas: AAS 48 [1956], 316ff.).
2. May the mystery of merciful love which is expressed in the Sacred Heart of Jesus help us to live better today's World Day of Refugees, whose theme is: "A place to call "home': Rebuilding life in dignity and safety". Every person needs a safe environment in which to live. Refugees aspire to this but unfortunately, millions in various countries of the world are still living in refugee camps or prevented for long periods from fully exercising their rights.
Let us not forget these refugee brothers and sisters of ours! I express my appreciation and encouragement to everyone in the Church who is committed to taking their part. At the same time, I am hoping for a renewed commitment in the International Community, so that the causes of this distressing phenomenon may be removed.
3. Let us confidently ask the Immaculate Heart of Mary, whose Memorial we celebrated yesterday, to obtain that humanity, in accepting Christ's message of love, may progress in brotherhood and peace, and that the earth become the "common home" of all the nations.
To special groups
I am pleased to greet the faithful who have come from Latvia and Lithuania, members of the Pro-Sanctitate Movement. Dear friends, may your visit to the tombs of the Apostles strengthen your faith and missionary commitment.
I then greet the Italian-speaking pilgrims, particularly the group from the Parish of Santa Maria di Testona in Moncalieri; the children preparing for First Communion from San Mauro in Lavello who are accompanied by their parish priest; the faithful from Case Finali, Cesena, who are celebrating the 50th anniversary of their parish, as well as those who have come from Milazzo; lastly, the members of the Misericordie of Italy and the "Fratres" blood donors.
I greet the pilgrims who have come from Poland and those who join us in our Sunday prayer. I thank Poland which has loyally defended in the European forum the Christian roots of our Continent, from which the culture and progress of the civilization of our times have developed. One does not cut away the roots from which one has grown.
I wish you all a good Sunday.
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 13 June 2004
    1. Today, Corpus Christi, the Solemnity of the Body and Blood of Christ, is being celebrated in Italy and in other countries. It is the feast of the Eucharist, the sacrament in which Jesus left us the living memorial of his Pasch, a central event in the history of humanity.
It is beautiful that on this day the faithful cluster round the Blessed Sacrament to adore it, accompany it in procession through the streets and, with many signs of devotion, express their faith in the living Christ and their joy in his presence.
2. Last Thursday, precisely when I was celebrating Corpus Christi with the Diocese of Rome, I announced that to coincide with the International Eucharistic Congress in Guadalajara, Mexico, a special "Year of the Eucharist" will begin this October, which will end in October 2005 with the Ordinary Assembly of the Synod of Bishops. Its theme will be: "The Eucharist, source and summit of the life and mission of the Church".
The "Year of the Eucharist" fits into the context of the pastoral project that I pointed out in the Apostolic Letter Novo Millennio Ineunte, in which I invited the faithful to "start afresh from Christ" (n. 29ff.). By contemplating with greater perseverance the Face of the Incarnate Word, truly present in the Sacrament, they will train themselves in the art of prayer (cf. n. 32) and undertake that high standard of Christian living (cf. n. 31), an indispensable condition for effectively developing the new evangelization.
The Eucharist is the centre of the Church's life. In it Christ offers himself to the Father for our sake, making us sharers in his own sacrifice, and gives himself to us as the bread of life for our journey on the highways of the world.
3. From this moment I entrust to the Virgin Mary, "Woman of the Eucharist" (cf. Encyclical Ecclesia de Eucharistia, nn. 53-58), this new initiative. May the one who in the Year of the Rosary helped us to contemplate Christ with her eyes and her heart (cf. Rosarium Virginis Mariae, nn. 10-17), enable every community in the Year of the Eucharist to grow in faith and love for the mystery of the Body and Blood of the Lord.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
Tomorrow we will celebrate World Day of Blood Donors. Giving one's blood voluntarily and as a free gift is an act of great moral and civic value. It is "a gift for life", as the motto of this Day says. May blood donors, who deserve the gratitude of all, increase in number in every part of the world.
To the Spanish-, Slovene- and Italian-speaking pilgrims
I cordially greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims, especially the students and teachers of San José de Reus College. May the Eucharist be the heart of your life! Have a happy Sunday!
I address a cordial greeting to the Slovenian pilgrims from Jursinec and Maribor. To you, dear friends, and to your families, I impart my Apostolic Blessing.
I greet all the Italian-speaking pilgrims, especially the groups of the faithful who come from the Diocese of Brescia and the Parishes of Mary Immaculate and St Vincent de Paul and of St Gerard Maiella in Rome.
I wish you all an enjoyable Sunday.
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
APOSTOLIC PILGRIMAGE OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL II TO BERN
ON THE OCCASION OF THE NATIONAL MEETING
OF THE YOUNG CATHOLICS OF SWITZERLAND
ANGELUS
Solemnity of the Holy Trinity
Sunday, 6 June 2004
  1. At the end of this celebration, I would like to go on a spiritual pilgrimage to the many Shrines and churches that also in Switzerland are dedicated to Mary.
I am thinking in particular of the Abbey of Einsiedeln and the Shrines of Our Lady of Sasso, Our Lady of Bourguillon and Our Lady of Vorbourg. From these holy places Mary watches over the valleys and districts of your Country, helping believers to preserve and increase those precious possessions: faith, hope and love.
2. Today I renew the entrustment of the Swiss People to the Blessed Virgin. May Mary watch over families, safeguarding conjugal love and supporting the mission of parents. May she comfort the elderly and help them to ensure that society does not lack their precious contribution. May she nourish in young people their sense of values and the commitment to abide by them. May she obtain for the entire national community the constant, unanimous desire to build together a prosperous and peaceful Country, which is both attentive and full of solidarity for people in difficulty.
3. I would especially like to entrust to Mary the youth of Switzerland, whom the Pope regards with affection and gratitude. Indeed, the young men of this Country have guaranteed to the Successor of Peter and to the Holy See the invaluable and highly regarded service of the Pontifical Swiss Guard. In the generous fidelity of the Swiss Guards everyone can admire the spirit of faith and love for the Church of so many Swiss Catholics.
4. Lastly, may the Blessed Virgin help your Nation to preserve harmony and unity among the various linguistic and ethnic groups which comprise it and to show appreciation for the contribution of each one. With these sentiments, let us recite together the prayer of the Angelus, a wonderful compendium of the whole Gospel.
I say to you once again with great joy: "thank you", Switzerland, and "thank you" to the organizational committee of this youth meeting. A special "thank you" goes to the choir. I thank all of you who have come here from the different Cantons.
Your presence gives me great joy.
May the Lord bless you and stay with you for all eternity!
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CÆLI
Pentecost Sunday, 30 May 2004
    1. Today the Church is celebrating the Solemnity of Pentecost, which recalls the miraculous outpouring of the Holy Spirit upon Mary and the Apostles in the Upper Room.
Fifty days after Easter, what Christ had promised the disciples came to pass: that they would be baptized with the Holy Spirit (cf. Acts 1: 5) and would thus be clothed in power from on high (cf. Lk 24: 49) to have the strength to proclaim the Gospel to all the nations. Inspired by the fire of the Spirit, the Apostles came out of the Upper Room and began to speak about the dead and Risen Christ to the faithful from every country who had arrived in Jerusalem; each one heard them speaking in his or her own native language.
2. With Pentecost, God fulfilled the plan he had revealed to Abraham to give life to a new people. The Church was born, the Mystical Body of Christ, scattered across the world. She is made up of men and women of every race and culture, gathered together in faith and in the love of the Most Blessed Trinity to be a sign and an instrument of the unity of the whole human race (cf. Second Vatican Council, Dogmatic Constitution on the Church Lumen Gentium, n. 1). Conformed by the Holy Spirit to Christ the new man, believers become his witnesses, sowers of hope and artisans of mercy and of peace.
3. Let us now turn to Mary Most Holy, whom we contemplate in the Upper Room as she receives the gift of the Holy Spirit, together with the Apostles and disciples. Let us confidently invoke her maternal intercession, so that the miracles of Pentecost may be renewed and all people can accept the Good News of salvation.
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CÆLI
World Day of Social Communications
Seventh Sunday of Easter, 23 May 2004
  1. Today, in Italy and in other countries, is the liturgical Solemnity of the Ascension of the Lord, which shows how the humanity that Christ assumed and redeemed was raised by him to full communion with God.
On this same Sunday we are celebrating the World Day of Social Communications. The Church closely and fondly regards those who work in this vast sector and is eager to develop a frank and open dialogue with them, in order to foster their commitment to humanity's authentic progress.
2. This year the theme on which we are invited to reflect is: The Media and the Family: a Risk and a Richness. Thanks to the modern technologies, many nuclear families are able to have direct access to the vast resources of communications and information and make use of them for education, cultural enrichment and spiritual growth. Yet the media also have the capacity to seriously damage families when they present an inadequate or even distorted outlook on life, on the family, on religion and on morality.
It is therefore vital to learn how to use them wisely and prudently. This duty primarily concerns parents, who are responsible for giving their children a healthy and balanced education. It likewise involves the public Authorities, who are required to implement suitable regulations which ensure that the media always show respect for the truth and for the common good.
3. In these days prior to Pentecost, let us invoke with Mary the gift of the Holy Spirit, so that he may help all who work in the sector of social communications to carry out their work with authentic apostolic zeal.
To special groups
I greet all the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors here today, including those from the San Gabriel Parish in the Archdiocese of San Antonio, Texas. May your time in Rome be filled with joy and deepen your love of the universal Church. God bless you all!
I would like to convey an affectionate thought to Cardinal Giovanni Battista Re, my Special Envoy to the celebrations for the 750th anniversary of the consecration of the Basilica of St Francis in Assisi. With him, I greet in particular the Bishop of that town, the Franciscan Religious Families, the Authorities and all the faithful who have gathered on this solemn occasion. I join in their common prayer to invoke the intercession of the Holy Patron of Italy upon the entire Nation.
A happy Sunday to everyone!
    © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CÆLI
Sixth Sunday of Easter, 16 May 2004
  In French:
I address a cordial welcome to the Lebanese pilgrims who have come for the canonization of Nimatullah Al-Hardini, with a particular greeting to His Beatitude Patriarch Nasrallah Pierre Sfeir and His Excellency General Émile Lahoud, President of the Lebanese Republic. I hope that the new Saint intercedes before God so that your compatriots continue on the roads of peace and fellowship.
In Spanish:
I greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims: the Cardinal Archbishop of Barcelona, the Bishops, priests and faithful who have come from Spain and America, and most especially the Sons of the Holy Family and the Missionary Daughters of the Holy Family of Nazareth, founded by the new Saint José Manyanet. By following his example and through his intercession, may we all walk the path of holiness, following the model of the spirit of Nazareth!
In Italian:
I greet the Cardinal Archbishop of Milan and the other Prelates present as well as the Delegation from the Italian Government and all the personalities present. I greet all who have come to honour the new Saints, particularly the spiritual sons and daughters of Don Orione from Italy and various parts of the world; the Rogationist Fathers and the Daughters of Divine Zeal; the Sisters of the Holy Family and the Congregation of the Holy Family of Bergamo; the pilgrims from the Archdiocese of Milan.
A special thought also goes to the [Italian] State Police on their anniversary, and I express my grateful appreciation for their generous service in maintaining public order, security and the peace of mind of citizens.
To all present I hope that the witness of the Saints may be for each of you an inspiration and support in the daily service to God and neighbour. May the Blessed Virgin Mary obtain this, she whom the new Saints venerate with filial love and to whom we now turn with trust.
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CÆLI
Fifth Sunday of Easter, 9 May 2004
  1. During the month of May, the People of God feel the need to deepen their devotion to Mary, whose motherly presence sustains Christians and the whole world.
From the moment the Virgin of Nazareth pronounced her "fiat", "under the special influence of the Holy Spirit, [her] heart, the heart of both a virgin and a mother, has always followed the work of her Son and has gone out to all those whom Christ has embraced and continues to embrace with inexhaustible love" (Encyclical Redemptor Hominis, n. 22). If, therefore, Christ's love is inexhaustible, the Immaculate Heart of his Mother must also have the "inexhaustibility of a mother" (cf. ibid.).
2. Jesus on the Cross wanted to extend Mary's spiritual motherhood and make it accessible to all by giving to her as a son the disciple whom he loved (cf. Jn 19: 26). From that moment, generations and generations of believers have called upon her and turn to her with love and hope. And Our Lady expresses her maternity "in its exceptional closeness to man and all that happens to him" (cf. ibid.).
Oh, if only human beings were aware of this extraordinary gift! How much more easily would they feel like brothers and sisters, doing away with hatred and violence to open their hearts to forgive those who have wronged them and to unlimited respect for the dignity of every person.
3. In a few days, on 13 May, we will be commemorating the apparition of the Virgin at Fatima and her appeal for conversion. Dear brothers and sisters, let us pray that the people of our time too will accept the pressing invitation of the one who watches lovingly over the Church and the world.
This morning in Rome the Springtime Marathon set out from St Peter's Square, in the context of the "Feast of Schools" organized by the Catholic schools in the Diocese. Similar events took place in other cities, especially Trent. I cordially greet the teachers, the pupils and their families, and I encourage each scholastic institute to continue its precious service of training the new generations.
Unfortunately, so many of the world's children have no primary education and end by being exploited as manpower. The World Congress against the Exploitation of Child Workers that will be taking place in Florence in the coming days will remind us of this. I hope that the meeting will help to promote the effective recognition of childrens' rights.
I greet the pilgrims who have come here, especially the faithful from the Parish of St John the Evangelist in Empoli.
Today is "Mother's Day". May the Mother of Jesus protect and support all mothers throughout the world!
I wish everyone a happy Sunday!
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CÆLI
Fourth Sunday of Easter, 2 May 2004
    1. In these days, Europe is reaching another important landmark in its history: 10 new countries are entering the European Union. Ten nations, which by culture and tradition were and felt European, are now to belong to this Union of States.
However, if the unity of the European peoples is to endure, it cannot be merely economic and political. As I had the opportunity to recall during my pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela in November 1982, if the soul of Europe is still united today, the reason is that it refers to common human and Christian values. The history of the formation of the European Nations keeps abreast with their evangelization. Consequently, despite the spiritual crises that have marked the life of the Continent in our day, its identity would be incomprehensible without Christianity.
2. For this very reason, the Church has made many contributions in recent years to the consolidation of Europe's cultural and spiritual unity, in particular with the Special Synods for Europe held respectively in 1990 and 1999. The vital sap of the Gospel can guarantee Europe a development that is consistent with its identity, in freedom and solidarity, in justice and peace. Only a Europe that does not eliminate but rediscovers its Christian roots, will be able to take up the challenges of the third millennium:  peace, intercultural and interreligious dialogue, the safeguarding of creation.
All believers in Christ of the European West and East are required to make their own contribution through open and sincere ecumenical cooperation.
3. As I greet with affection the nations that are being welcomed into the European Union in these days, my thoughts go to the many Shrines, each one of which down the centuries has kept alive devotion to the Virgin Mary. Let us entrust the present and future of the Continent to Our Lady, Mother of Hope, and to the Saints whom we venerate as Patrons of Europe.
This morning in St Peter's Basilica, I ordained 26 new Priests. I renew my cordial greetings to them and to their relatives and friends. May they always be vivid images of the Good Shepherd among the People of God.

Today we are celebrating World Day of Prayer for Vocations. I extend a special thought to all who have set out on the path of formation for the priesthood and the consecrated life; and I invite you to pray that the Church will always have an abundance of holy vocations.
I wish everyone a good Sunday and a good beginning of this month of May, dedicated especially to Our Lady!
   © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CÆLI
Third Sunday of Easter, 25 April 2004
  I wish to address a cordial greeting to the pilgrims who have come from various countries to pay homage to the new Blesseds.
To Spanish-speaking pilgrims
I greet with affection the Cardinals, Bishops, priests and other Spanish-speaking pilgrims present, especially the Missionaries of Mary Immaculate and St Catherine of Siena, and the Handmaids of St Margaret Mary and the Poor, celebrating the Beatification of their respective Foundresses. I also greet the Salesians of Spain, rejoicing in the witness of Sr Eusebia Palomino. May these new Blesseds assist and encourage everyone towards the goal of holiness.
To Portuguese-speaking pilgrims
I give a heartfelt greeting to the Portuguese-speaking pilgrims together with their Pastors and the Authorities, who are celebrating the Beatification of Alexandrina of Balasar. May the Immaculate Heart of Mary, to whom she was especially devoted, be a portal of hope for humanity of our time.
To Polish-speaking pilgrims
I cordially greet my fellow countrymen and women. Today the Salesians celebrate as they welcome a new patron, Bl. Augusto Czartoryski. I address to them a special greeting: may the example of your Blessed Brother strengthen your zeal and may his protection and intercession sustain you in your daily duties. It is a personal joy for me to be able to welcome to the Vatican on this occasion the family of Bl. Augusto, so well-deserving for Poland. I was closely linked to them as Bishop of Krakow, especially with the Bishop Prelate Stanislaus Czartoryski. I cordially bless all of the pilgrims here present and those united to us by way of radio and television.
To Italian-speaking pilgrims
I greet the Sisters of Charity of St Joan Antida Thouret and the faithful who are devoted to Nemesia Valle, especially those who have come from the Archdiocese of Turin.
Each of the new Blesseds fostered a filial and profound devotion to Mary Most Holy. With the same trust we also turn to her, imploring that the human family may discover the paths of justice and peace.
    © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CÆLI
Second Sunday of Easter, 18 April 2004
  1. On Good Friday, as he hung on the Cross, Jesus bequeathed to us his testament of forgiveness: "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do" (Lk 23: 34). Jeered and tormented, he implored mercy for his torturers. In this way his wide-open arms and pierced side became the universal sacrament of the fatherly tenderness of God, who offers forgiveness and reconciliation to all.
When he appeared to his disciples on the day of the Resurrection, the Lord greeted them with these words: "Peace be with you", and showed them his hands and his side with the marks of the passion. Eight days later, as we read in today's Gospel, Jesus once again came and stood among them in the Upper Room, and once again said to them: "Peace be with you" (cf. Jn 20: 19-26).
2. Peace is the gift par excellence of the crucified and Risen Christ, the result of the victory of his love over sin and death. In offering himself as an immaculate victim of expiation on the altar of the Cross, he poured out on humanity the beneficial flow of Divine Mercy.
Jesus, therefore, is our peace, because he is the perfect manifestation of Divine Mercy. In the human heart, which is an abyss always exposed to the temptation of evil, he infuses God's merciful love.
3. Today, the Second Sunday of Easter, we are celebrating Divine Mercy Sunday. The Lord is also sending us out to bring to everyone his peace, which is founded on pardon and the forgiveness of sins. This is an extraordinary gift, which he desired to link with the sacrament of Penance and Reconciliation. How deeply humanity needs to experience the effectiveness of God's mercy in these times marked by growing uncertainty and violent conflicts!
May Mary, Mother of Christ our Peace, who received his testament of love on Calvary, help us to be witnesses and apostles of his infinite mercy.
I now address a special greeting to the pilgrims from various nations who have gathered here on the occasion of Divine Mercy Sunday. Dear friends, I ask you to be witnesses of God's merciful love, after the example of St Faustina Kowalska.
I wish everyone a good Sunday!
Appeal for the hostages' release in Iraq
I am following with deep sorrow the sad news that comes to us from the Holy Land and from Iraq. May the bloodshed of our brethren cease! Such inhuman acts are contrary to God's will.
I am particularly close in my thoughts and prayers to all the families who fear for the fate of their loved ones, especially those who have been taken hostage.
I ask the kidnappers to act in a humane way. I implore them to give the persons they are holding back to their families, as I pray our merciful Lord to grant reconciliation and peace to the peoples of the Holy Land and Iraq, and to all who work for reconciliation and peace in those regions.
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CÆLI
Easter Monday, 12 April 2004
  1. "Regina caeli laetare, alleluia!". In the Easter Season, the traditional prayer of the Angelus is replaced by the hymn of the Regina Caeli that expresses Mary's joy at the Resurrection of her divine Son. Thus, Mary became a model for Christian communities "rejoicing" in the Passover of the Lord, a source of true joy to all believers. Indeed, the Risen Christ is the source of and ultimate reason for this spiritual joy that no shadow can dim. The liturgy of the Octave of Easter echoes it constantly: "Christ has risen as he promised". This is also what we proclaim in the "Regina Caeli", a prayer so dear to popular piety.
Aware of this saving event that changed the course of history, the Church associates herself with the Woman who intimately experienced the passion, death and Resurrection of Jesus. And the Church asks Mary to sustain her faith: "Ora pro nobis Deum": pray to the Lord for us.
2. Dear brothers and sisters, on this Easter Monday, an extension of Easter Day, may each one of us pause by the empty tomb to meditate on the supreme miracle of Christ's Resurrection.
May the Virgin Mary, silent witness of this mystery, strengthen us in our personal attachment to the One who died and rose for the salvation of every human being. May she be our teacher and guide in the faith; may she support us in moments of doubt and temptation; may she obtain for us that inner peace which no one can disturb, because it is rooted in the certainty that Christ is truly risen.
Conscious of this, I renew to you all my greetings for Holy Easter, as I entrust to the Mother of the crucified and Risen Jesus the expectations and hopes, and likewise, the anxieties and fears of the whole world.
    © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
PALM SUNDAY OF THE PASSION OF OUR LORD
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 4 April 2004
19th World Youth Day
"We wish to see Jesus" (Jn 12: 21)
    1. I address a cordial greeting to you, Bishop Franz-Josef Hermann Bode, in charge of youth ministry, and to those who have taken part in the solemn liturgical celebration in Berlin at which Cardinal Sterzinsky presided. I warmly thank both you and the representative of the young people for your words addressed to me.
I then greet with great joy you young Germans who, with your leaders and chaplains, have gathered closely around the Cross which has journeyed through numerous European countries. The Cross will now set out again, travelling through your Country to reach Cologne, where the 20th World Youth Day will be celebrated in August 2005. I encourage the entire Church in Germany to prepare for this great event.
2. Before concluding, I would now like to address a cordial greeting to all the pilgrims present here. I offer a special greeting to you, dear young people who have been celebrating the eighth International Youth Forum, organized by the Pontifical Council for the Laity. I am likewise delighted to greet the rector and lecturers present at the Forum, as well as the Bishops, priests and lay persons involved in the university apostolate. Lastly, I extend a cordial welcome to the young Romans and those from other parts of the world who have gathered in Rome for Holy Week. I invoke upon you all the maternal protection of Mary.
Dear young people, before the Angelus, I thank you for your joyful and promising presence. I assure you that you will always be welcome at the Pope's House. God bless and protect you!
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
   
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Fifth Sunday of Lent, 28 March 2004
  1. In my Lenten Message this year I asked that children be put at the centre of the Christian communities' attention. Many of them are victims of dangerous diseases, including tuberculosis and AIDS, are deprived of education and go hungry. Starvation and malnutrition, aggravated by disconcerting gaps in health care, continue to be the daily cause of death for many of these little ones who are even denied the minimum indispensable for their survival.
2. In some corners of the earth, especially in the poorest countries, children and adolescents are the victims of a terrible form of violence: they are enlisted to fight in the so-called "forgotten wars".
Indeed, they suffer a doubly scandalous aggression: they are made victims of war, and at the same time forced to play the lead in it, swept away in the hatred of adults. Stripped of everything, they see their future threatened by a nightmare difficult to dispel.
3. Our youngest "brothers and sisters" who suffer from hunger, war and diseases are launching an anguished appeal to the adult world. May their cry of pain not go unheard! Jesus reminds us: "Whoever receives one such child in my name receives me" (Mt 18: 5).
The Lenten season spurs Christians to accept these words of the Gospel more generously in order to express them in courageous interventions for children at risk and abandoned.
May the Virgin Mother of God help children in difficulty and bring success to the efforts of all those who seek lovingly to alleviate their sufferings.
I wish you all a good Sunday.
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Fourth Sunday of Lent, 21 March 2004
  Before concluding this solemn celebration, I would like to address a heartfelt greeting to all of you, dear brothers and sisters, who have paid homage to the new Blesseds by your devout participation.
To Spanish-speaking faithful
I greet with affection the Spanish-speaking Cardinals, Bishops, priests and faithful, together with the Authorities who have come for the Beatification of Mother Matilde Téllez and Mother Piety of the Cross. I greet especially the Daughters of Mary, Mother of the Church and the Salesian Sisters of the Sacred Heart of Jesus. May the example and intercession of these new Blesseds help us to follow in the footsteps of Jesus Christ, making us instruments of his mercy and collaborators with Providence. May they also be an encouragement to remain hopeful, courageous and generous in the face of the sorrow of many families, of the people of Madrid and of the entire Country of Spain following the recent terrorist attacks. Love is stronger than hatred and death!
To Italian-speaking faithful
I greet the pilgrims who have come from different parts of Italy and the religious and civil Authorities who accompany them. A grateful thought goes especially to the Archbishop of Milan, Cardinal Dionigi Tettamanzi, to the priests and faithful of Monza, birthplace of Blessed Luigi Talamoni, and to the "Misericordine" Sisters. I then greet the Carmelite Family, especially the nuns of the Carmel of Ragusa who are celebrating Mother Maria Candida of the Eucharist.
Following the example of the new Blesseds, we now turn with trust to the intercession of Our Lady for the needs of the Church and the entire world.
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana    
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Third Sunday of Lent, 14 March 2004
    1. The Gospel that the Liturgy presents to us this Sunday refers to two tragic events that occurred in Jesus' time: the bloody repression of a rebellion and the collapse upon the surrounding crowd of the tower in Siloam (cf. Lk 13: 1-9). This brings us back to what is happening in our time, unfortunately marked by recurring news of violence and death.
Last Sunday, I referred to hotbeds of war and terrorist attacks that stain with blood various parts of the world. Then last Thursday came the dramatic attacks in Madrid: they took a toll of 200 victims and caused more than 1,000 injuries. The atrocious crime stunned world public opinion. We are deeply distressed at such barbarity and wonder how the human soul can go so far as to conceive such execrable crimes.
2. In reasserting my total condemnation of these unjustifiable acts, I once again express my participation in the grief of the victims' relatives and my closeness in prayer to the injured and their families.
The wave of solidarity witnessed in every corner of Spain last Friday, with the participation of the political Authorities of all Europe, caused a great reverberation throughout the world.
It is precisely by relying on the united contribution of all the healthy forces of the Continent that it is possible to look ahead with confidence and hope for a better future. Above all, those who believe in God, the Creator and Father of all human beings, must feel committed to working for the construction of a more fraternal and supportive world despite the problems and obstacles they may encounter in this process, which is only right and cannot be delayed.
3. In a special way, let us entrust to the motherly hands of Mary, Our Lady of Mercy, the victims of the terrible terrorist attack in Madrid. Let us ask her to protect and to watch over the beloved Nation of Spain, Europe and the whole world.
    © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Second Sunday of Lent, 7 March 2004
  1. “Jesus took Peter, John and James, and went up onto a mountain to pray” (Lk 9:28): this is how the Gospel of the Transfiguration of Christ begins, characterizing this Second Sunday of Lent. Luke the Evangelist stresses that Jesus is transfigured on the high mountain while praying, immersed in intimate and profound dialogue with God the Father. A dazzling light radiates from him, a foretaste of the glory of the Resurrection.
2. Each year in preparation for Easter, Lent invites us to follow Christ in the mystery of his prayer, source of light and strength in time of trial. In reality, to pray means to be spiritually immersed in God, in an attitude of humble cohesion to his will. The interior light that transfigures the human person comes from this trusting abandonment to God, making the person a witness of the Resurrection. However, it is only in listening to Christ, in following him with docility even to the passion and Cross, that this can become a reality. We must look towards him “because there is salvation in no one else but him, the Son of God”.
3. Twenty five years ago, precisely at the beginning of Lent, I wanted to extend to the entire world this message in the Encyclical Letter Redemptor Hominis (cf. n. 7). If human beings want to know themselves thoroughly, I wrote at the time, they must draw near to Christ, enter into him, “appropriate” and assimilate the entire reality of the Redemption (cf. n. 10). How true this truth still remains today!
May the Virgin Mother of the Redeemer help us to start afresh from Christ to build a world according to the true dimension of the human being.
***
After the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
Next Saturday [13 March], at 5:45 p.m., a Marian prayer vigil will be held in the Paul VI Audience Hall on the occasion of the Second European Day of University Students with the theme: “Christ, hope for Europe”. Dear University students, I await you in large numbers! We will entrust to Mary, Sedes Sapientiae, the way for the European people.
I wish you all a good Sunday.
At the conclusion of the Angelus, the Holy Father said the following:
During the week of Retreat in the Vatican, I did not forget the painful situation that exists in certain African nations and in the Middle East, especially in the Holy Land and in Iraq.
Those suffering because of unacceptable acts of violence and terrorism, which can only serve to worsen the condition of life of these dear populations, are our brothers and sisters.
As I pray for them and invite you to do the same, I would like to ask once again that the pathway be found to forgiveness and reconciliation.
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
First Sunday of Lent, 29 February 2004
    1. Today, the First Sunday of Lent, the Gospel presents to us Christ who, after having received Baptism from John in the Jordan, withdrew into the desert, led by the Holy Spirit, where he remained for 40 days. The Gospel account once again brings to our attention the three well-known temptations that are an echo of the ancient deception whereby Satan caused the fall of our first parents. But Christ, the new Adam, overcomes them, decisively rejecting the tempter: "It is said, "You shall not tempt the Lord your God'" (Lk 4: 12).
2. Jesus' victory over the Evil One assures us that we will not succumb at the moment of trial as long as we remain united to the Lord. In this perspective, Lent invites us to make a special commitment to the process of spiritual growth.
For this occasion I sent the Church a Message in which I especially wanted to remember children, who are so often the innocent victims of the wickedness of others. The Church devotes special care to them because Christ himself told us: "Whoever receives one such child in my name receives me" (Mt 18: 5). May this season of the liturgical year become a generous time of solidarity towards these little ones, especially those in the gravest dangers and difficulties.
3. Dear Brothers and Sisters, I invite you all to pray for this intention. I also ask you to accompany me spiritually in the Retreat, which will begin this evening as it does every year. My collaborators in the Roman Curia will be taking part in it with me. May the Virgin of listening make these days of silence, meditation and intense communion with Christ fruitful for us all.
After praying the Angelus the Holy Father greeted the following groups: 
I greet the Italian pilgrims present here, especially the faithful who have come from Misano Gera d'Adda, Pisa, Sestri Levante and Cecchina, as well as the pilgrims from the Dioceses of Noto, Agrigento, Caltagirone and Catania. I also greet the group of Syrian Christians who live in Sweden, and the group of families bound to the spirituality of the Marist Sisters. I wish you all every spiritual good and a profitable beginning of Lent.
I cordially greet the German-speaking pilgrims, especially the "Theologie im Fernkurs" group from Würzburg. May you always be true Christian witnesses to Christ and his Church!
***
After the Angelus, the Pope addressed the current political unrest in Haiti:
We are hearing sorrowful and disturbing news from Haiti. In the face of this situation I feel it is my duty to ask all Haitians to have the courage and humility to make the decisions that the good of the Country demands.
As I encourage the international community's diplomatic work and ask for a generous commitment on the part of humanitarian Organizations, I impart a special Blessing to the beloved Haitian people.
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 22 February 2004
  1. Today, 22 February, is the liturgical Feast of the Chair of St Peter. It sheds light on the special ministry of strengthening and guiding the Church in the unity of the faith which the Lord entrusted to the Head of the Apostles. It consists in this ministerium petrinum (Petrine ministry), the particular service that the Bishop of Rome is called to render to the entire Christian people. It is an indispensable mission that is not built on human prerogatives but on Christ himself, the cornerstone of the Ecclesial Community.
Let us pray that the Church in the different cultures, languages and traditions will be unanimous in believing and professing the truths of faith and morals passed down by the Apostles.
2. To become aware of the Church as the mystery of unity, dear brothers and sisters, we must fix our gaze on Christ. And Lent, which we will begin next Wednesday with the austere and meaningful rite of the imposition of ashes, is a privileged season for intensifying our commitment to conversion to Christ. The Lenten journey will thus become a favourable time to examine ourselves with sincerity and truth, to restore order in our personal life and in our relationships with others and with God. "Repent and believe in the Gospel" (Mk 1: 15). This is the invitation of the liturgy that will accompany us in the coming weeks until the Easter celebrations.
3. May the Virgin Mother of God support us on this demanding spiritual journey. May she make us docile to listening to the Word of God, which urges us to personal conversion and fraternal reconciliation. May Mary guide us to the encounter with Christ in the Paschal Mystery of his death and Resurrection!
After praying the Angelus the Pope said the following: 
I greet the Italian-speaking pilgrims; in particular the group of young people from the Parishes of St Alexander in Solbiate Comasco and of St John the Baptist in Parè and the young people of the deanery of Paderno Dugnano, Milan, who have come to renew their profession of faith at the Tomb of the Apostle Peter, as well as the pilgrims from St Agnes Parish in Modena with their parish priest.
    © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 15 February 2004
  1. Yesterday, 14 February, we celebrated the feast of Sts Cyril and Methodius, Apostles of the Slavs and, together with Abbot St Benedict, Patrons of Europe. By evangelizing the central and eastern regions of the Continent, they made a crucial contribution to ensuring that Christian Europe could breathe with both its lungs: that of the West and that of the East. Indeed, just as it is impossible to think of European civilization without the Benedictine work and legacy, it is impossible to disregard the evangelizing and social action of the two holy Brothers from Thessalonica.
2. In these months, the process of the political integration of the Continent involves certain Eastern European Countries in which Sts Cyril and Methodius were active. These Nations bring their specific cultural and spiritual riches: Christianity has exercised an extraordinary cohesive force on them with respect for their specific characteristics.
One example in this regard was the evangelizing method of Sts Cyril and Methodius. Motivated by the ideal of uniting the new believers in Christ, they adapted liturgical texts to the Slavic language and the customs of the new peoples to Greco-Roman law (cf. Encyclical Slavorum Apostoli, nn. 12-13).
3. The encounter of the Gospel with the cultures ensured that Europe became a "workshop" where important and lasting values were forged down the centuries. Let us pray that in our day too, the universal Message of Christ entrusted to the Church may be the light of truth and the source of justice and peace for the peoples of the Continent and the whole World. We ask this through the intercession of the Virgin Mary and the Saints who are invoked as Patrons of Europe.
I wish you all a good Sunday!
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 8 February 2004
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. The World Day of the Sick will be celebrated next Wednesday, 11 February, Memorial of Our Lady of Lourdes. The principal events will take place precisely in Lourdes, where Mary Most Holy appeared to St Bernadette Soubirous, presenting herself as the "Immaculate Conception". Furthermore, this year is the 150th anniversary of the Dogma of the Immaculate Conception, proclaimed by my venerable Predecessor Bl. Pius IX, whose feast we celebrated yesterday.
2. The close connection between Our Lady of Lourdes and the world of suffering and illness is well known. The sick have always been the chief persons at the Shrine which came into being at the Grotto of Massabielle, and over the years Lourdes has become an authentic stronghold of life and hope. How could it be otherwise? The Immaculate Conception of Mary is, in fact, the first fruit of the Redemption brought about by Christ and the pledge of his victory over evil. The spring of water bubbling from the ground from which the Virgin asked Bernadette to drink is reminiscent of the power of Christ's Spirit who heals human beings completely and gives them eternal life.
3. May Our Lady watch over those who will be taking part in the forthcoming events scheduled at Lourdes: the meetings on pastoral health care in European countries and on the special relationship between Mary Immaculate and the sick. Let us entrust to the Blessed Virgin the solemn Eucharistic Celebration at which my Special Envoy, Cardinal Lozano Barragán, President of the Pontifical Council for Health Pastoral Care, will be presiding.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said:
I greet the workers from the steel mills in Terni who have come on pilgrimage by foot to draw attention to the employment crisis in that great industrial complex. I cannot forget that it was precisely there that I made my first Pastoral Visit to an Italian factory, on 19 March 1981. Dear workers, as I said at the time, I appreciate your indomitable will to "defend your work and its dignity" (Address to the Workers of Terni, 19 March 1981, n. 1; L'Osservatore Romano English edition [ORE], 30 March 1981, p. 5). I am very close to you in the current difficulties and hope that a just solution can be found to them for you and for your families.
A happy Sunday to you all!
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 1 February 2004
    1. "There is no future without children". This is the theme of the Pro-Life Day being celebrated throughout Italy today. In their Message, the Italian Bishops highlight the many causes of the current demographic crisis. They recall that all too often the cultural and social context does not promote the family or the role of parents.
Furthermore, many married couples would like more children but are forced, as it were, to abandon this because of economic concerns. Although public institutions provide considerable assistance, it is often insufficient. People are feeling the need for a more concrete family policy.
2. The nuclear family that develops from marriage is the basic cell of society. In it, as in a reassuring nest, life should always be nurtured, defended and protected, and today's Pro-Life Day reminds everyone of this fundamental duty.
Dear brothers and sisters, we must not resign ourselves to any attacks on human life, least of all abortion! I renew my appreciation for the courageous support that the Italian Pro-Life Movement offers to this cause, and I urge every Ecclesial Community to support its initiatives and the services it offers. Efforts must be redoubled so that the right to life of unborn children is not affirmed against their mothers but with their mothers.
3. Let us now turn to Mary Most Holy and call on her especially for families so that, trusting in divine help, they may carry out with joy and dedication their wonderful mission to give humanity a future rich in hope.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus the Holy Father said:
I warmly greet the many young immigrants who come from the Diocese of Caserta and all those who are striving to solve their often serious problems which are the cause of so much suffering and hardship.
I also greet the other pilgrims present, especially the groups of faithful from the Dioceses of Padua and Treviso.
A happy Sunday to you all!
     © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Feast of the Conversion of St Paul
Sunday, 25 January 2004
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today, Feast of the Conversion of St Paul the Apostle, we conclude the Week of Prayer for Christian Unity, during which Christians in every corner of the world prayed together so that their full communion might be fulfilled according to the Lord's will: "Ut unum sint - that all may be one" (Jn 17: 21). The fervent prayer of Jesus in the Upper Room continues to remind Christian communities that unity is a gift to welcome and develop in an ever-deeper way.
2. Christian unity has been a constant preoccupation of my Pontificate and continues to be a priority demand of my ministry. In the Apostolic Letter Novo Millennio Ineunte at the close of the Jubilee, I wanted to mention that this longing by Christ is "a binding imperative, the strength that sustains us, and a salutary rebuke for our slowness and closed-heartedness" (n. 48).
Therefore, may the duty to pray for unity and its continual pursuit never diminish! Obstacles, difficulties and even misunderstandings and failures cannot and must not discourage us, since the "hope that even within history we shall be able to reach full and visible communion with all Christians" is based not on our own human strength but on the prayer of our mutual Lord (cf. ibid.).
3. Let us now confidently call upon Mary, Mother of Christ and the Church, so that she will sustain and accompany us on the ecumenical journey.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father discussed the following issues:
This afternoon the traditional Ecumenical Celebration to close the Week of Prayer for Christian Unity will be held in the Basilica of St Paul-Outside-the-Walls. I invite everyone to unite themselves spiritually to such an important moment of communion.
In light of today's celebration of the World Day of Those Sick with Leprosy, my thought goes to those who still suffer from Hansen's disease. As I invite you to pray for them and for those entrusted with their care, I encourage the efforts of the international community to eliminate this disease.
Next Sunday Pro-Life Day will be celebrated in Italy and the Week of Life and the Family will begin in the Diocese of Rome. From this moment, I invite the families of Rome to participate in the "Feast of the Family and of Life" which will take place on 1 February at 3: 30 p.m. at the Sports Palace.
I now extend a special greeting to the Cardinal Vicar and to the children and youth of Rome's Catholic Action (ACR) who have formed the "Caravan of Peace" from Piazza Navona to St Peter's Square, concluding in this way the "Month of Peace". A word of praise and encouragement to the "ACR" for their efforts!
I greet all of the pilgrims present, especially the parish communities from Crispano, Pianura, Pagani and Conza della Campania.
I wish everyone a good Sunday.
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana   
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 18 January 2004
    1. "Peace I leave with you". These words of Jesus from John's Gospel (cf. 14: 27) are the theme of the annual Week of Prayer for Christian Unity that begins today. It is significant that this theme was suggested by the Churches of the Middle East where unity and peace are the most acutely felt priorities.
In the coming week, Christians of the different denominations and traditions in every part of the world will gather together to pray intensely to the Lord to strengthen their common commitment to full unity. They will do so starting precisely from the rich meaning contained in Christ's promise and meditating each day on the Gospel gift of peace and the commitments it entails.
2. In promising them his peace, Christ assured the disciples of his support in trials. And is not the enduring division between Christians a painful trial? This is why they keenly feel the need to turn to their one Lord, in order that he help them overcome the temptation to despair on the gruelling journey that leads to full communion.
In a world thirsting for peace, it is indeed urgent that Christian communities proclaim the Gospel unanimously. It is indispensable that they witness to divine Love which unites them, and make themselves messengers of joy, hope and peace, becoming the leaven of a new humanity.
3. I hope with all my heart that this Week of Prayer will bring abundant fruits for the cause of Christian unity. May it be a favourable opportunity for those who believe in Christ to exchange a fraternal embrace in the peace of the Lord! May the motherly intercession of the Virgin Mary, Mother of Christ, obtain this for us.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said: 
I assure the great peoples of the East of my closeness, especially the Chinese, the Vietnamese and the Koreans who will joyfully be celebrating the new lunar year in the coming days, and I warmly wish them peace and prosperity.
Today Rome is celebrating Catholic Schools Day that fits well into the pastoral lines for dioceses in recent years: "With the family, let us build a better society". I greet with affection the directors, teachers and students from the many Catholic schools of the Diocese who are gathered here. I express to you all, Religious and lay people, my appreciation for the quality of your commitment. I know well the difficulties that you face each day. I am grateful to you and urge you to persevere in your service with steadfast trust in the Lord.
I greet the pilgrims present, especially the Minim Sisters of the Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ who have come here on the occasion of the 75th anniversary of their Institute, and the "Fratres" Group of Bone-Marrow and Blood Donors from Figline Valdarno.
I wish you all a good Sunday.
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana 
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Feast of the Baptism of the Lord
Sunday, 11 January 2004
  1. Today we are celebrating the Feast of the Baptism of the Lord. The Gospels say that Jesus went to John the Baptist by the Jordan River, desiring to receive from him the baptism of repentance. But immediately afterwards, while Jesus was praying, "the Holy Spirit descended upon him in bodily form, as a dove, and a voice came from Heaven, "You are my beloved Son; with you I am well pleased" (Lk 3: 21).
It is the first public manifestation of Jesus' messianic identity after the adoration of the Magi. This is why the liturgy brings the Baptism of the Lord closer to the Epiphany with a leap in time of about 30 years: today we see the Child whom the Magi adored as a messianic King consecrated by the Father in the Holy Spirit.
2. The messianic "style" of Jesus is already clearly outlined in his baptism in the Jordan: He comes as the "Lamb of God" to take upon himself and take away the sins of the world (cf. Jn 1: 29, 36). As such, John the Baptist points him out to the disciples (cf. Jn 1: 36). We too, after celebrating at Christmas the great event of the Incarnation, are asked to keep our gaze fixed on Jesus, the human face of God and the divine face of man.
3. Mary Most Holy is a teacher of contemplation beyond compare. If, humanly, she had to suffer at seeing Jesus leave Nazareth, from his manifestation she received new light and strength for her pilgrimage of faith. The Baptism of Christ is the first mystery of light for Mary and for the whole Church. May it enlighten all Christians on their way!
After the prayer of the Angelus, the Pope said:
I greet all the pilgrims present, especially the faithful who have come from the Dioceses of Castellaneta and of Oria.
I wish you all a good Sunday!
To the Polish-speaking pilgrims:
I greet the pilgrims who have come from Poland: the folklore group, Pilsko from Zywiec, the persons who have come on their own and those who have joined us by radio and television. Happy New Year!
To the Ukrainian-speaking pilgrims:
Christ is born! I greet the Ukrainian-speaking pilgrims and all those present in St Peter's Square. I warmly bless you in this New Year. Christ is born!
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana  
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Solemnity of the Epiphany of the Lord
Tuesday, 6 January 2004
  1. On today's Feast of the Epiphany of the Lord, Matthew's Gospel speaks of a mysterious "star" that guided the Magi to Jerusalem and then to Bethlehem, where they adored the Child Jesus (cf. 2: 2.7.9.10).
The star that led the Magi to Christ recalls the rich symbolism of light, vividly present at Christmas. God is light and the Word made man is "the light of the world" (Jn 8: 12), the light that guides the peoples on their journey: "Lumen gentium".
2. My venerable Predecessor Paul VI was moved by this great truth when he made his historical pilgrimage to the Holy Land exactly 40 years ago. Precisely on 6 January 1964 he spoke memorable words in the Basilica of the Nativity in Bethlehem. He said, among other things: "Let us look at the world with immense sympathy. If the world feels foreign to Christianity, Christianity does not feel foreign to the world" (Insegnamenti, Vol. II, 1964, p. 32). And he added that Christianity's mission in humanity's midst is a mission of friendship, understanding, encouragement, promotion, exaltation: in other words, a mission of salvation (cf. ibid., pp. 32-33).
From the place that saw the birth of the Prince of Peace, he urged the leaders of nations to closer collaboration in order to "establish peace in truth, in justice, freedom and fraternal love" (ibid., pp. 34-35).
3. I wholeheartedly make my own these words of the Servant of God Paul VI as I invoke the intercession of Mary Most Holy, Star of humanity on its pilgrimage through time. With the motherly help of the Virgin, may every human being reach Christ, the Light of truth, and may the world advance on the path to justice and peace.
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said: 
I extend a cordial greeting to my brothers and sisters of the Eastern Churches who are celebrating Christmas in these days in accordance with the Julian calendar, assuring them of my constant remembrance in prayer.
I greet the pilgrims present, in particular the participants in the historical and folkloric procession "Viva la Befana!", this year dedicated to the traditions of the town of Anagni and its surroundings.
My best wish to everyone is that you always walk in Christ's light.
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana  
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 4 January 2004
  1. On this first Sunday of the New Year, the second after Christmas, once again the liturgy proposes for our meditation the marvellous passage from the Prologue of John's Gospel.
In the beginning", he wrote, "was the Word..." (Jn 1: 1). The Greek word is "Logos", but in the Apostle's mind the reference is to "Wisdom", which is personified in the Old Testament as the Being who regulates the cosmos and history:  "...and the Word was with God and the Word was God... all things were made through him".
2. Here, however, comes the surprising affirmation: "The Word became flesh and dwelt among us" (Jn 1: 14). John himself, who fixes his gaze of faith on the divine origins of Christ, forcefully insists on the reality of his Incarnation. He juxtaposes two seemingly incompatible words: "Word" and "flesh". Yes! Jesus is true God and true man. He is the Only-Begotten Son of God, whom John and the other Apostles have "seen", "heard" and "touched" (cf. I Jn 1: 1-3). In his humanity dwells the whole fullness of his divinity (cf. Col 2: 9).
3. Dear friends, guided by the Evangelist John, let us draw near to the mystery of the Child of Bethlehem in whom God fully revealed his face. Let us reflect in silence with the Virgin Mary before the eternal Word who for our sake made himself a tiny child. Today, as he did then, he gives to those who believe in his name the "power to become children of God" (cf. Jn 1: 12). This is the mystery and the gift of Christmas!
After leading the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said: 
I greet the pilgrims who are present, and in particular, the faithful from Giulianello di Cori, Province of Latina, who have brought to life the traditional procession of the Magi Kings.
I renew my best wishes to everyone for a good year in the love and peace of Christ.
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana  
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Solemnity of Mary, Mother of God
World Day of Peace
Thursday, 1 January 2004
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today, on the first day of the New Year, the liturgy rings out with the ancient biblical blessing in which the name of the Lord is invoked upon the people. "The Lord lift up his countenance upon you, and give you peace" (Nm 6: 26). I wholeheartedly extend this best wish to the whole world, invoking God's blessing upon the human family. May the Lord make his face shine upon every man and woman, and grant peace to all peoples.
2. Peace is first and foremost a gift of God but it is also a project to whose realization each one must make a personal contribution. This is what I wanted to recall in my Message for today's World Day of Peace. Its theme is: "An ever timely commitment: teaching peace".
This Day fits into the context of the solemn celebration of Mary Most Holy, Mother of God. In her, we contemplate the Mother of the "Prince of Peace" (Is 9: 6), of the One who is "our peace" (Eph 2: 14).
3. May Our Lady help us to be witnesses and builders of this peace, the heavenly gift and daily achievement of people who have the common good at heart.
I offer you who are present here and all those who have joined us by means of radio or television my most cordial best wishes for prosperity and peace at the beginning of this new year. Happy New Year to everyone!
After leading the recitation of the Angelus the Holy Father greeted pilgrims in Italian, French, English, German, Spanish, Portuguese and Polish.
I reciprocate with deep gratitude the good wishes that the President of Italy offered to me yesterday evening. I assure him of my prayers for his important service and invoke peace and prosperity upon him and upon the beloved Italian people.
I wish the French-speaking pilgrims a happy and holy year in the light of Christ!
With warm greetings at the beginning of this new year I invoke upon the English-speaking pilgrims God's blessings of joy and peace.
I offer heartfelt greetings to my German-speaking brothers and sisters. In this new year may the Lord offer you his grace and peace.
I greet the Spanish-speaking people. May the new year be a step forward towards peace among peoples. Happy New Year!
May Mary Most Holy, Mother of God and of Mercy, inspire everyone to live in peace and concord. Happy New Year!
To my compatriots I express the wish that the New Year may bring days of peace, well being and the blessings of God to all. God bless you!
Lastly, the Pope said in Italian:
I greet those taking part in the march sponsored by the Sant'Egidio Community whose theme is "Peace in all countries". I then greet the young people of the Don Orione Work, as well as the families of the Family Love Movement who have kept vigil and prayed for peace on this New Year's Eve.
  © Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana  
 
EUCHARISTIC CELEBRATION
FOR THE REPOSE OF THE SOUL OF POPE JOHN PAUL II
REGINA CÆLI
Feast of Divine Mercy
Second Sunday of Easter, 3 April 2005
     Pope John Paul II died peacefully on the evening of 2 April, 9: 37 p.m. Rome time. The last gift of the Holy Father for Divine Mercy Sunday, 3 April (also the Second Sunday of Easter), was the Regina Caeli, read by Archbishop Leonardo Sandri, Substitute of the Secretariat of State, at the end of the Holy Mass celebrated that day in St Peter's Square for the deceased Pope. "I have been charged", Archbishop Sandri said, "to read you the text that was prepared in accordance with his explicit instructions by the Holy Father John Paul II. I am deeply honoured to do so, but also filled with nostalgia".
Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today the glorious Alleluia of Easter resounds. Today's Gospel from John emphasizes that on the evening of that day he appeared to the Apostles and "showed them his hands and his side" (Jn 20: 20), that is, the signs of the painful passion with which his Body was indelibly stamped, even after the Resurrection. Those glorious wounds, which he allowed doubting Thomas to touch eight days later, reveal the mercy of God who "so loved the world that he gave his only Son" (Jn 3: 16).
This mystery of love is at the heart of the liturgy today, the Second Sunday of Easter, dedicated to the devotion of Divine Mercy.
2. As a gift to humanity, which sometimes seems bewildered and overwhelmed by the power of evil, selfishness and fear, the Risen Lord offers his love that pardons, reconciles and reopens hearts to love. It is a love that converts hearts and gives peace. How much the world needs to understand and accept Divine Mercy!
Lord, who reveal the Father's love by your death and Resurrection, we believe in you and confidently repeat to you today:  Jesus, I trust in you, have mercy upon us and upon the whole world.
3. The liturgical solemnity of the Annunciation that we will be celebrating tomorrow urges us to contemplate with Mary's eyes the immense mystery of this merciful love that flows from the Heart of Christ. With her help, we will be able to understand the true meaning of Easter joy that is based on this certainty:  the One whom the Virgin bore in her womb, who suffered and died for us, is truly risen. Alleluia!
  Copyright © Libreria Editrice Vaticana
   
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Palm Sunday, 20 March 2005
  The Holy Father was unable to preside at the special Concelebrated Mass in St Peter's Square, but appeared at his study window after the Eucharistic celebration, which was presided over by Cardinal Camillo Ruini, Vicar of Rome. Using an olive branch, the Pope blessed the numerous young people from Rome and around the world who had gathered with other pilgrims in the Square. Following the celebration of Holy Mass and prior to the noon recitation of the Angelus, Archbishop Leonardo Sandri, Substitute, read the Pope's Reflection to the pilgrims present.
Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. I greet you with great joy at the end of the solemn Palm Sunday celebration, and I thank Cardinal Camillo Ruini who has presided at it in my name.
Twenty years ago, right in this Square, the World Youth Days were initiated. Because of this, I address today in a particular way the young people:  you who are present here, dear friends, and those in every part of the world.
2. Dear young people, the World Youth Meeting in Cologne, in the heart of Germany and Europe, will be taking place this coming August. In that city's marvellous cathedral the relics of the Holy Magi are venerated, so that in a certain sense they have become your guides on the way to that event. They came from the East to pay homage to Jesus and declared: "We... have come to worship him" (Mt 2: 2). These words, so rich in meaning, are the theme of your spiritual and catechetical journey towards World Youth Day.
Today, you adore the Cross of Christ, which you carry across the world, because you have believed in the love of God that was revealed in the crucified Christ.
3. Dear young people, I realize more and more how providential and prophetic it was that this very day, Palm Sunday and the Passion of the Lord, should have become your Day. This feast possesses a special grace, that of joy united to the Cross, which in itself sums up the Christian mystery.
Today, I tell you:  continue unflaggingly on the journey on which you have set out in order to be witnesses everywhere of the glorious Cross of Christ. Do not be afraid! May the joy of the Lord, crucified and Risen, be your strength, and may Mary Most Holy always be beside you.
  © Copyright 2005 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Fifth Sunday of Lent, 13 March 2005
  At noon, seated at a window on the 10th floor of the Gemelli Polyclinic, the Holy Father blessed and spoke briefly to the faithful gathered in the square below. Archbishop Leonardo Sandri, Substitute of the Secretariat of State, then read the prayer of the Angelus. The event was relayed via television to St Peter's Square, while the Holy Father viewed images of the faithful in the Square.
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. In these days of my hospital stay here at the Gemelli, I have been particularly aware of the presence and attention of so many people who work in the mass media. Today I want to offer them a word of gratitude, for I am well aware of the sacrifices they make in carrying out their appreciated service, thanks to which the faithful in every part of the world can feel that I am closer and can accompany me with their affection and prayers.
2. In our epoch of global communications the mass media play a very important role. Those who work in this sector, who must constantly provide timely information respectful of human dignity and attentive to the common good, also have a great responsibility.
In this season of Lent, which is an invitation to draw more abundantly from the Word of God, I am eager to recall that it is also possible to find spiritual nourishment on the radio, television and Internet. I am grateful to those who dedicate themselves to these new forms of evangelization, making the most of the mass media.
3. Lastly, let us pray to Mary Most Holy so that she will help us to prepare properly for Holy Week, which begins next Sunday. I hope to see many young people in St Peter's Square taking part in the solemn Palm Sunday liturgy that is a spiritual preparation for the World Youth Day, scheduled to take place in Cologne, Germany.
After the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said: 
Dear brothers and sisters, thank you for your visit. Long live Wadowice! I greet the Legionaries of Christ. A happy Sunday and a good week to all!
  © Copyright 2005 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
  
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Fourth Sunday of Lent, 6 March 2005
  The Holy Father made a brief appearance at a window on the 10th floor of the Gemelli Polyclinic where he is hospitalized. He waved and made the sign of the cross, blessing the faithful who had gathered below to see him.
At the Vatican, Archbishop Leonardo Sandri, Substitute of the Secretariat of State, read the Pope's Reflection to the faithful, prior to leading the recitation of the Angelus and imparting the final Blessing to the faithful on the Pope's behalf.
Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Today too I would like to renew my gratitude for the many signs of affection I have received. I am thinking in particular of the numerous Cardinals, Bishops, priests and groups of the faithful, of the Ambassadors and ecumenical Delegations who have come to the Gemelli Polyclinic in these days.
I would like to express special gratitude for the closeness of believers of other religions, Jews and Muslims in particular. Some of them have wanted to come and pray here at the hospital. This is a comforting sign to me for which I thank God.
2. Together let us continue our preparation for Easter, offering our sufferings to God for the good of humanity and for our own purification. In today's Gospel, as he cures the man born blind, Christ presents himself as "the light of the world" (Jn 9: 5). He came to open human eyes to the light of faith. Yes, dear friends, faith is the light that guides us on our way through life, it is the flame that comforts us in difficult times.
3. When a child is born we say that the baby "comes into the light". For believers, who are born to supernatural life through Baptism, Lent is a favourable time to "come into the light", that is, to be reborn in the Spirit, renewing the grace and commitment of Baptism.
May Mary Most Holy help us to obtain from Christ the gift of an ever stronger and clearer faith, so that we may be consistent and courageous witnesses of his Gospel.
  © Copyright 2005 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Third Sunday of Lent, 27 February 2005
  Archbishop Leonardo Sandri, Substitute of the Secretariat of State, read the Holy Father's Address to pilgrims gathered in St Peter's Square. He also led the recitation of the Angelus and imparted the final Blessing on behalf of the Pope. The Holy Father himself greeted and blessed pilgrims from a window at Gemelli Hospital.
1. Once again, dear brothers and sisters, I address you from the "Agostino Gemelli Polyclinic". I warmly thank you and feel you all close to me in spirit. I think of you, individuals and groups who are gathered today in St Peter's Square, and all those from all over the world who are concerned about me. I ask that you continue to assist me, especially with your prayers.
2. The penitential season of Lent that we are living helps us to understand better the value of suffering, which in one way or another touches us all. It is in looking at Christ and following him with patient trust that we are able to understand how every human form of suffering contains a divine promise of salvation and joy. I desire that this message of comfort and hope reaches everyone, especially those who are going through difficult moments and to those who suffer in body and in spirit.
3. To Mary, Mother of the Church, I once again entrust myself: Totus tuus! May she help us to fulfil God's will in every moment of life.
    Copyright © Libreria Editrice Vaticana
     
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Second Sunday of Lent
Sunday, 20 February 2005
  1. The Spiritual Exercises in which I took part together with many of my Collaborators in the Roman Curia concluded yesterday with a solemn Eucharistic Celebration, followed by Adoration.
The Eucharist is the source from which communion between the members of the mystical Body of Christ draws ever new vigour.
2. In this perspective the special task entrusted to Peter and his Successors becomes crystal clear:  the Petrine ministry is essentially a service to the unity of the Church. "You are Peter, and on this rock I will build my church" (Mt 16: 18). Further comforting words echo this promise of the Lord:  "I have prayed for you [Simon] that your faith may not fail; and when you have turned again, strengthen your brethren" (Lk 22: 32).
3. "Feed my lambs.... Tend my sheep" (Jn 21: 15, 16, 17). I feel Jesus' invitation particularly alive in my heart when I contemplate the Eucharistic Mystery. To him, the Good Shepherd, I entrust the entire People of God on this Lenten journey to Easter.
Let us invoke the support of Mary, Mother of the Church, with the customary prayer of the Angelus.
  After the Angelus, the Pope said: 
I greet the pilgrims who have come from Murska Sabota and Stranice in Slovenia! God be with you!
I greet the pilgrims present here. In particular, the faithful from the Parishes of Our Lady of the Most Holy Sacrament and of the Holy Canadian Martyrs in Rome, as well as the groups from some Sicilian Dioceses and those from the Diocese of Anagni.
I wish you all a good Sunday!
  © Copyright 2005 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
First Sunday of Lent
Sunday, 13 February 2005
  Dear Brothers and Sisters,
1. Welcome! Once again we meet in this place to praise the Lord. I would like to thank you - and all those who are following us via radio and television - for your closeness and affection, and above all for your prayers during the days of my stay at the Gemelli Polyclinic.
I always feel in need of your help before the Lord in order to carry out the mission that Jesus has entrusted to me.

2. Last Wednesday, with the rite of Ashes, we began Lent, the liturgical season that reminds us every year of a fundamental truth: we do not enter eternal life without bearing our cross in union with Christ. We do not attain happiness and peace without courageously facing inner combat. This combat is won with the weapons of penance: prayer, fasting and works of mercy. All this must be done in secret, without hypocrisy, in a spirit of sincere love for God and our brothers and sisters.
3. This evening I will begin spiritual exercises, as I do every year, together with my collaborators in the Curia. In silence and recollection I will pray to the Lord for all the needs of the Church and of the world. I also ask you, dear brothers and sisters, to accompany us with your prayers.
May Mary Most Holy, who in the midst of her daily tasks always kept in her mind and heart the mystery of her Son, guide us to carry out a fruitful Lenten journey.
  After the Angelus the Pope said:
While I continue to pray for peace in the Middle East, I address my heartfelt appeal for the release of Giuliana Sgrena, the Italian journalist, and all who have been kidnapped in Iraq.
I cordially greet the French-speaking pilgrims, especially the school of faith from Fribourg. A good Lent to all.
I greet all the English-speaking pilgrims, including the members of the Schola Cantorum of the Cardinal Vaughan Memorial School, London. May God bless you and your families!
I greet with affection the Spanish-speaking pilgrims, particularly those from Extremadura. Intensify your journey of conversion with prayer, almsgiving and fasting. Thank you very much!
I greet the Italian-speaking pilgrims, especially the faithful from the Parishes of Sts Peter and Paul in Mezzate and St Francis in Pavia, as well as the confirmandi from the Parish of St Mary in Torregalli in Scandicci.
I wish you all a good Sunday!
  © Copyright 2005 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 6 February 2005
  1. Today, I am speaking to you from the Agostino Gemelli Polyclinic, where for several days I have been cared for with loving concern by doctors, nurses and health-care personnel, whom I warmly thank.
Dear brothers and sisters and those who are close to me in every corner of the earth, I reach out to all of you with my gratitude for your sincere and heartfelt affection, which I have felt with special intensity in these days.
I assure you, one and all, of my gratitude, which I express in constant prayer to the Lord for your intentions, as well as for the needs of the Church and the great world causes. Thus, I continue to serve the Church and the whole of humanity, even here in the hospital among other sick persons, of whom I am thinking with affection.

2. Pro-Life Day is being celebrated today here in Italy. In their Message for the occasion, the Italian Bishops emphasized the mystery of life as a relationship that demands trust. We must trust in life!
Unborn children are silently laying claim to trust in life. Many children, deprived of their family for various reasons and who can find a home that welcomes them through adoption or a foster family, also ask for trust.
3. I am thinking with special concern of the beloved Italian People and everyone who has at heart the defence of newborn life. In particular, I stand with the Italian Bishops, who continue to urge Catholics and people of good will to defend the fundamental right to life with respect for the dignity of every human person.
May Mary, Queen of families, help us to succeed in facing the "challenge to life" that is the greatest of the challenges to humanity today.
  © Copyright 2005 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
POPE JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 30 January 2005
  1. Today St Peter's Square is gladdened by the presence of many children of Catholic Action who are concluding their "month of peace". I greet you with affection, dear boys and girls and children of the A.C.R.!
In today's Gospel, Jesus proclaims:  "Blessed are the peacemakers" (Mt 5: 9). These little ones can also be peacemakers! They too must train themselves in dialogue and must learn " to defeat evil with good " (cf. Rom 12: 21), as I recalled for everyone in the recent Message for the World Day of Peace. It is necessary to defeat injustice with justice, falsehood with truth, vengeance with forgiveness, hate with love.

2. This lifestyle is not improvised but requires education, beginning in infancy. This education comes from wise teachings and above all from sound models in the family, in school and in every part of society. Parishes, oratories, associations, movements and ecclesial groups must more and more become privileged places of this pedagogy of peace and love, where growing together is learned.
3. Let us pray to Mary, Queen of Peace, so that she may help youth, who so much desire peace, to become its courageous and tenacious builders.
After the Angelus, the Pope said:
Today is the celebration of the World Day of Those Sick with Leprosy. In poorer areas of the world, this incurable disease continues to afflict millions of persons, many children among them. To all these brothers and sisters I send a special greeting, assuring them of my prayers, which I extend to all those who in various ways assist them. I hope that the efforts made by the international community enable them to completely eliminate this social wound.
I salute the pilgrims present, particularly the Association of Italian Friends of Raoul Follereau, and I wish you all a happy Sunday.
  © Copyright 2005 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 23 January 2005
  1. The "Week of Prayer for Christian Unity" is drawing to a close in these days. As usual, it will be ending with the celebration of Vespers on 25 January in the Basilica of St Paul's-outside-the-Walls. I will join in spirit in this liturgy, in which representatives of the other Churches and Christian Confessions will be taking part and whose principal celebrant will be Cardinal Walter Kasper, President of the Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity.

2. I ask Christian communities to live this annual spiritual event intensely; in a certain sense it gives us a foretaste of the joy of full communion, at least in our desire and in unanimous prayer for it. In fact, the knowledge that unity is in the first place a gift of God to be tirelessly implored in humility and truth, is always becoming ever clearer.

3. May Mary Most Holy, Mother of the Church, help us to overcome every obstacle and to obtain this gift as soon as possible. I fervently urge all believers, especially young people, to extend their ecumenical commitment throughout the year and to become everywhere instruments and witnesses of the full communion that Christ prayed for in the Upper Room.
  After the Angelus: 
Today in Rome we are celebrating World Day for Catholic Schools on the theme:  "Church, family and school:  educating together". In order to renew this commitment administrators, teachers, parents and pupils of Catholic schools in Rome have gathered in St Peter's Square, together with those responsible for pastoral work in the Diocese. I offer them my affectionate and grateful greeting, as I express the hope that the precious service they offer Catholic schools will be ever more appreciated and supported by both the ecclesial and civil communities.
I greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims, especially those from the parishes of La Epifanía, San Francisco Javier y Santa Marta de Valencia, as well as the members of the Dioceses of Avila and Extremadura. Pray for the full communion of Christians! The world is waiting for your Gospel witness of unity! Thank you!
I wish you all a good Sunday.
  © Copyright 2005 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
World Day of Migrants
Sunday, 16 January 2005
  1. Today, the entire Church is celebrating the "World Day of Migrants and Refugees". In the Message for this occasion I wanted to underline the importance of the integration among peoples that requires the proper balance between the assertion of one's own identity and the recognition of the identity of others.
I address my cordial greeting to all migrants and I hope that dialogue will help to develop sympathy and understanding among the different cultures.

2. Preceded by the important Day for Jewish-Christian Dialogue, the annual "Week of Prayer for Christian Unity" will begin the day after tomorrow, 18 January. Its theme this year is:  "Christ, the Church's one foundation" (cf. I Cor 3: 1-23).
I invite every community to make meaningful gestures of outreach and ecumenical dialogue and to implore God for the gift of the full unity of all Christ's disciples.
3. Let us entrust these important ecclesial events to Mary Most Holy. May her motherly intercession help Christians to form one heart and mind (cf. Acts 4: 32) and help all human beings to grow in solidarity in order to build a world of peace.

After the Angelus, the Pope said: 

I greet the pilgrims present, in particular the faithful from the parish of Sts Eustace and Anthony the Abbot in Montoro Superiore, who have come with the "torch of peace" which a courier will take by foot from Rome back to their town.
I wish everyone a good Sunday!
  © Copyright 2005 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Feast of the Baptism of the Lord
Sunday, 9 January 2005
  Baptism of the Lord:  becoming a constant gift to God
1. Today we are celebrating the Feast of the Baptism of Jesus. According to the Evangelists, this event marks the beginning of his Messianic ministry. Christ's mission thus begun would be fulfilled in the Paschal Mystery in which, through his death and Resurrection, he was to take away the sin of the world (cf. Jn 1: 29).

2. The mission of Christians also begins with Baptism. The rediscovery of Baptism through suitable adult catechetical programmes is therefore an important aspect of the new evangelization. Renewing in a more mature way one's own acceptance of the faith is the condition for true and full participation  in the Eucharistic Celebration, the summit of ecclesial life.

3. May Mary Most Holy help all who through Baptism are reborn "from water and the Spirit" to make their lives a constant gift of themselves to God in the daily practice of the commandment of love, thereby exercising the common priesthood that belongs to every baptized person.
After the Angelus: 

On this Sunday of the Baptism of the Lord, my thoughts go to all the children who have been baptized during the past year. I embrace and bless them. I also bless the godfathers and godmothers, and in particular, the parents of the newly baptized and urge them all to cultivate within them, by word and example, the seed of divine life that was sown by the sacrament of Baptism.
I cordially greet the group of Priests from El Salvador who are participating in this Marian prayer. Dear brothers, may your visit to the tombs of the Apostles strengthen your commitment to giving your whole self to Christ and his Church.
I wish you all a good Sunday!
  © Copyright 2005 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Solemnity of the Epiphany
Thursday, 6 January 2005
  Adoring Christ with a child's heart
1. "We... have come to worship him" (Mt 2: 2). These words of the Magi which we heard in the Gospel are the theme of the next World Youth Day that will be held in Cologne this August. I invite the young people of Germany and their peers across the world to set out in spirit toward this important rendezvous, to discover the Face of God in Christ and in the Magi.

2. Epiphany is also the World Day of Missionary Children. Children are the present and future of the Church. They play an active role in the evangelization of the world and, with their prayers, help to save and improve it.
As I renew my prayers for the small victims of the tsunami in Asia, I cannot forget the children who are victims of hunger and disease, of war and terrorism, nor, in addition, those who are kidnapped, disappear or are exploited by despicable trafficking.

3. My grateful thoughts go to all those who are committed to protecting the littlest ones, and especially to the Pontifical Society of the Holy Childhood.
"Whoever does not receive the kingdom of God like a child shall not enter it" (Mk 10: 15).
 May Mary Most Holy, who today presents Christ to the peoples, help us to adore him with a child's heart.

After the Angelus: 
I extend my cordial greetings of peace and joy in the Lord to our brothers and sisters of the Eastern Churches who are celebrating Holy Christmas in these days.
I greet the pilgrims present, especially those taking part in the historical and folkloric procession that is inspired this year by the traditions of the Fiumicino area. I also greet the candidates for Confirmation from Villafranca Padovana with their parish priest, catechists and parents.
I wish you a happy feast day!
  © Copyright 2005 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Sunday, 2 January 2005
  1. The Gospel reading of Christmas Day resounds once more in the liturgy on this first Sunday of the new year:  "The Word became flesh and made his dwelling among us" (Jn 1: 14).
The Word of God is the Eternal Wisdom that acts in the universe and in history. It is Wisdom that is fully revealed in the mystery of the Incarnation, in order to establish a kingdom of life, love and peace.

2. In its turn, faith teaches us that even in the most difficult and painful trials - such as the disaster that has struck Southeast Asia in these past days - God never abandons us:  he came, in the mystery of Christmas, to share our existence.
The Child of Bethlehem is the One who, on the vigil of his death of redemption, will leave to us the commandment to love one another as he has loved us (cf. Jn 13: 34). It is in the concrete fulfilment of "his" commandment that he makes his presence felt.

3. This evangelical message grounds the hope of a better world, on the condition that we walk in "his" love. At the beginning of a new year, may the Mother of the Lord help us to make this programme of life our own.
  © Copyright 2005 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
JOHN PAUL II
ANGELUS
Solemnity of Mary, Mother of God
38th World Day of Peace
Saturday, 1 January 2005
  1. We begin the New Year with the celebration of the feast of Mary, Mother of God, the Theotokos.
The Blessed Virgin offers to the world the Messiah who is God's blessing for every person and for the whole world. The greetings we exchange today are based on this blessing:  good wishes, because in Christ, God has filled us with every good; wishes for peace, because "he is our peace" (Eph 2: 14).

2. Today's World Day of Peace fits into this liturgical context. Its theme this year is the Apostle Paul's exhortation:  "Do not be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good" (Rom 12: 21).
"Evil... is the result of human freedom" (Message for World Day of Peace 2005, n. 2) and it is overcome when human freedom, urged by grace, opts firmly, that is, definitively, for good, for God.

3. May Mary, Queen of Peace, help us all to build together this fundamental good of human co-existence. Only in this way will the world be able to advance on the paths of justice and fraternal solidarity.
Happy New Year!
After the Angelus:

I warmly thank the President of the Italian Republic for the good wishes he addressed to me yesterday evening and I warmly reciprocate them, invoking peace and prosperity for the whole Italian Nation.
Once again, I express my closeness to the peoples struck by the recent tragic disaster. I offer the victims of the catastrophe and their relatives the assurance of my prayers and note with pleasure the vying for solidarity that is developing in every part of the world. Hope for better days in the course of the year that begins today is founded on this sense of human solidarity, as well as on God's help.
I wish the French-speaking pilgrims a happy and holy New Year, in the peace of Christ!
With warm New Year greetings, I invoke upon the English-speaking pilgrims God's Blessings of joy and peace!
Confident of God's faithful support, I pray that the German-speaking brothers and sisters will have trust and true peace in the New Year!
I greet the Spanish-speaking people and wish them a happy New Year, full of peace!
I offer the Portuguese-speaking pilgrims my good wishes for a Happy New Year, with the motherly protection of Mary Most Holy!
I extend to my fellow citizens my good wishes for peace, prosperity and God's Blessing in the New Year!
I greet the young people of the "Opera Don Orione", the families of the Movement of Family Love and the friends of "Fraterna Domus", as well as the numerous participants in the peace march organized by the Community of Sant'Egidio.
A Happy New Year to you all!
    © Copyright 2005 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana
 
